

=== PAGE 1 ===

08226-11-T 
Von Neumann's Self-Reproducing 
Automata 
ARTHUR W. BURKS 
June 1969 
Department of Health. Education, and Welfare 
National Institutes of Health 
Grant No. GM-12236-03 
Bethesda, Maryland 
and 
Department of the Navy 
Office of Naval Research 
Contract No. N00014-67-A-0181-0011 
Washington, D. C. 
and 
U. S. Army Research Office (Durham) 
Grant No. DA-31-124-AR0-D-483 
Durham, North Carolina 
KM   r,<   IQ 
rr/J^   Computer and Communication Sciences Department 
Distribution of this document is unlimited. 
Reproduced by the 
CLEARINGHOUSE 
(or Federal Scientific & Technical 
Information Springfield Va   22151 
i 
;'.3 

=== PAGE 2 ===

THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN 
College of Ligerature, Science, and the Arts 
Computer and Communication Sciences Department 
Technical Report 
VON NEUMANN'S SELF-REPRODUCING AUTOMATA 
Arthur W. Burks 
supported by: 
Department of Health, Education,  and Welfare 
National Institutes of Health 
Grant No. GM-12236-03 
Bethesda, Maryland 
and 
Department of the Navy 
Office of Naval Research 
Contract No.  N00014-67-A-0181-0011 
Washington,  D.  C. 
and 
U. S. Army Research Office (Durham) 
Grant No. DA-31-124-ARO-D-483 
Durham, North Carolina 
administered through: 
OFFICE OF RESEARCH ADMINISTRATION    ANN ARBOR 
June 1969 
Distribution of This Document is Unlimited 

=== PAGE 3 ===

ABSTRACT 
John von Neumann's kinematic and cellular automaton systems are des- 
cribed. A complete informal description of the cellular system is pre- 
sented including an explanation of the realization of logical components, 
the design of computer organs, the construction, destruction and move- 
ment of organs by sequences of internally originated pulses, universal 
computation and construction, and self-reproduction. Connections between 
von Neumann's automaton research and his work on computer design are 
brought out, and the significance of cellular arrays for biological research 
discussed. 
iii 

=== PAGE 4 ===

mm 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
ABSTRACT 
LIST OF FIGURES 
1. KINEMATIC SELF-REPRODUCTION 
2. CELLULAR AUTOMATA 
3. VON NEUMANN'S CELLULAR SYSTEM 
4. CONFLUENT AND TRANSMISSION STATES 
5. SOME COMPUTER ORGANS 
6. CONSTRUCTION AND DESTRUCTION 
7. FINITE AUTOMATA 
8. CONSTRUCTING ARM 
9. UNIVERSAL COMPUTER 
10. UNIVERSAL CONSTRUCTOR AND SELF-REPRODUCTION 
11. KINEMATIC AND CELLULAR SELF-REPRODUCTION 
12. HEURISTICS OF CELLULAR SPACES 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
in 
v 
1 
7 
10 
12 
14 
19 
23 
2o 
30 
35 
43 
47 
97 
IV 

=== PAGE 5 ===

LIST OF FIGURES 
Fig. 1  Cellular space 65 
Fig. 2  Von Neumann's 29-states 66 
Fig. 3  Switch and delay realization of confluent and ordinary 
transmission elements 
(a) Switch and delay circuits 67 
(b) Corresponding confluent and ordinary transmission elements 68 
Fig. 4 Operation of special transmission states 69 
Fig. 5 Pulser P(.10101) 70 
Fig. 6 Decoder JDCIOIOI) 71 
Fig. 7 A coded channel 72 
Fig. 8 Crossing organ 73 
Fig. 9 Construction process 74 
Fig. 10 Example of the construction process 75 
Fig. 11 Example of the destruction process 76 
Fig. 12 Periodic pulser ^^(IGlOl) 
(a) Repeater for periodic pulser 77 
(b) Periodic pulser 78 
Fig. 13 Flip-flop and gate 79 
Fig. 14 Recognizer R(101001) 80 
Fig. 15 Von Neumann's transmission function 81 
Fig. 16 Schematic diagram of finite cellular automaton 
(a) Transition and output table for a particular finite automaton 32 
(b) Corresponding finite cellular automaton g» 
Fig. 17 Operation of the constructing arm g^ 
Fig. 18 Constructing arm gc 
Fig. 19 Horizontal advance of constructing arm g^ 
Fig. 20 Vertical advance of constructing arm 07 

=== PAGE 6 ===

.z-jzzixs itT.Taa:.- 
Fig. 21 Horizontal retreat of constructing arm with construction of y and 6  88 
Fig. 22 Vertical retreat of constructing arm with construction of y  and 6   89 
Fig. 23 Injection of starting stimulus into the constructed automaton 90 
Fig. 24 Tape, reading loop, and constructing arm 91 
Fig. 25 Writing "one" in cell x    and lengthening the reading loop 92 
Fig. 26 Universal computer 93 
Fig. 27 Universal constructor 94 
Fig. 28 Modified universal constructor 95 
Fig. 29 Automata self-reproduction 96 
vi 

=== PAGE 7 ===

[This paper uses some of my figures and text from von Neumann's 
Theory of Self-Beproduoing Automata» which I edited and completed.    Some 
use is also made of figures from my "Cellular Automata," which appeared 
in Russian at pp.   100-111 of Theory of Finite and Probabtliatio Automata, 
edited by M.  A.  Gavrilov, Moscow, Nauka,   1965.] 
1.     KINEMATIC SELF-REPRODUCTION 
The late John von Neumann once pointed out that, in the past, 
science has dealt mainly with problems of energy, power, force and motion. 
He predicted that in the future science would be much more concerned with 
problems of control, programming, information processing, communication, 
organization, and systems.    General purpose digital computers provide an 
excellent opportunity for studies of this kind, and von Neumann started a 
theory of automata based on them.    He wished this theory to deal with the 
control,  informational, and logical aspects of both man-made automata 
(such as digital and analog computers) and natural systems  (such as cells, 
nervous systems, and brains).    Von Neumann's conception of automata theory 
was very close to Wiener's conception of cybernetics, and each influenced 
the other.     But von Neumann's automata theory placed more emphasis on logic 
and digital computers, while Wiener's cybernetics was oriented more around 
physiology and control engineering. 
[Von Neumann,  "The General and Logical Theory of Automata," "Probabilistic 
Logics and the Synthesis of Reliable Organisms from Unreliable Components," 
and review of Wiener's Cybemetias -    See also my Introduction to Theory of 
Self-Reproducing Automata, and the Preface to Wiener's Cybemetioe •] 
- 
I 

=== PAGE 8 ===

One problem von Neumann posed and essentially solved was: What kind 
of logical organization is sufficient for an automaton to control itself in 
such a manner that it reproduces itself? He first formulated this question 
in terms of a kinematic automaton system, and later reformulated and solved 
it in terms of a cellular automaton system. We will explain the kinematic 
system briefly and then develop the cellular system sufficiently to see how 
self-reproduction is accomplished in it. 
[For a rigorous and more complete discussion the reader is referred 
to von Neumann's Theory of Self-Heproduaing Automata. ] 
Consider a digital computer or automaton which operates synchronously 
and which is composed entirely of switches ("and," "or," and "not") and 
delays (which delay pulses for one time unit). We will refer to these 
idealized elements as computing elements. 
[Actually, von Neumann used idealized neurons as computing elements. 
These neurons combined the functions of switching and delay and were passive 
in that they produced no output unless they were stimulated. This type of 
neuron was used by von Neumann in working out the logical design of the 
first stored program electronic computer, the EDVAC.  See Theory of Self- 
Reproducing Automata,  pp. 9, 44, 99.] 
To represent an input capability and a dynamic output capability we will 
add five other kinds of primitive elements: a kinematic (muscle-like) 
element (e.g., an artificial hand), which can move elements around when 
signaled to do so by a computing element; a cutting element, which will 
disconnect two elements when signaled to do so by a computing element; 
a fusing (welding or soldering) element, which will connect two elements 
together when signaled to do so by a computing element; a rigid element 
(e^g-» girder or bar), which will provide rigid or structural support to 

=== PAGE 9 ===

assemblies of elements; and a sensing element, capable of recognizing 
each kind of element and communicating this information to a computing 
element.    We shall call an automaton composed of these elements a kinematic 
automaton. 
To model self-reproduction at even the most abstract logical level 
we need to place a kinematic automaton in an environment with which it 
can interact.    This environment will be composed of the same stuff as 
the automaton is made of,  namely,  the various primitive elements just 
listed.     Imagine an infinite body of liquid with infinitely many copies 
of each kind of part distributed in random fashion over its surface. 
There are switches, delays,  kinematic elements, cutting elements, fusing 
elements, rigid elements,  and sensing elements floating on the surface; 
imagine that they are moving back and forth i.» random motion, after the 
manner of molecules of a gas.    On this arrangement,  an indefinite 
supply of parts is available to any kinematic automaton which floats on 
the surface of the "lake."    We will call this environment, together with 
any kinematic automata it contains,  a kinematic automaton system. 
It is well known how to construct a finite automaton out of switches 
and delays.    A Turing machine consists of a finite automaton operating on 
an indefinitely expandable tape.    We will indicate in a general way how 
to construct tape in the kinematic system, and how to augment a finite 
automaton so that it can read an arbitrary position on the tape, modify an 
arbitrary position on a tape,  and extend  (or contract)  the tape. 
The matrix or basis of the tape is a zig-zag arrangement of the rigid 
elements   (girders).    Each intersection holds a binary digit or bit of 
information:  a "one" is represented by a protruding girder attached to the 
intersection,  a "zero" by the absence of such a girder.    For example. 

=== PAGE 10 ===

BWS^W^w"W 
^l^lJ^     stores 0110110 while       j^L^J^sJ 
stores 1101001.    The finite automaton can move itself relative to the 
tape by means of kinematic elements.    It can change a "one" to a "zero" 
by separating a protruding girder from the tape intersection to which 
it is attached.    It can change a "zero" to a "one", or extend the tape, 
by sensing a girder on the surface of the lake with a sensing element, 
picking up the girder and placing it in position with a kinematic element, 
and connecting the girder to the tape   by means of a fusing element. 
The primitive elements of von Neumann's kinematic system are at a 
higher level than atoms and molecules, so that this system is not suitable 
for modeling the chemical, physical, or biological aspects of self- 
reproduction.    It was intended for modeling the control, organizational, 
progranuning, and logical aspects of self-reproduction.    Let us view this 
process at the block diagram level. 
One can see in a general way how construction takes place in the 
kinematic system.    A finite kinematic automaton can be completely described 
by listing its parts and their connections, and this description PW can 
be stored on the tape.    A (finite) constructing automaton can then be 
designed which will interpret this description and carry out the construction. 
The parts  (elements) needed are moving randomly on the surface of the lake, 
and hence will come in contact with the constructing automaton, which can 
sense the particular kinds of parts needed, pick them up,  and assemble them 
according to the specification V(M). 
Self-reproduction in this scheme takes the following abstract form. 
Let W   be a constructing machine.    To begin with, machine M   stores its own 
description PW )on its tape,  and floats in an environment of an unlimited 
number of parts of each kind.    The constructing machine M   then interprets 
the description VfM ) and makes a copy of the machine described, namely M . 

=== PAGE 11 ===

i 
I The constructing machine M   next makes a tape for the new machine, copies 
its own tape contents {namely, V(M )} on this new tape, and attaches the 
tape to the newly constructed machine M  . The process just described began 
with a machine M   storing V(M )  on its tape, and ended with a second machine 
M   storing V(M )  on its tape. Compare Figure 29. This is a kind of self- 
reproduction. 
This is the general picture von Neumann had in mind. How can it be 
worked out in detail in a logically rigorous way? To do this we must 
completely specify the powers of each element and the rules of operation 
of the elements when they interact with one another in a machine and on 
the interface between a machine and the environment. Consider, as an 
example, a constructing automaton. This employs kinematic, cutting, and 
fusing elements to move and operate on other elements. How does the 
constructing automaton find the elements and loci for the kinematic, 
cutting, and fusing elements to operate on? It might do this via the 
kinematic, cutting,and fusing elements themselves, if these elements had 
sensing powers of their own. Alternatively, it might do this by means of 
sensing elements, provided it could coordinate the operation of a sensing 
element with a kinematic (or cutting or fusing) element. 
It is a difficult problem to develop a complete, precise set of rules 
for the kinematic system which is at the same time simple and enlightening. 
Moreover, it is doubtful that anything of much value is contributed by the 
kinematic or motional capabilities of the system. On the one hand, these 
kinematic features of the model are too remote from chemistry, physics, and 
mechanics to be of much interest in their own right; while on the other hand, 
they are too remote from problems of organization, control, and logic to 
contribute to our understanding of these problems. Thus the motional 

=== PAGE 12 ===

capability of the kinematic system is the source of complexities which, 
in the present context, are not worth their cost, and might better be 
eliminated. 

=== PAGE 13 ===

2,     CELLULAR AUTOMATA 
The concept of a cellular automaton eliminates just these complexities. 
[This concept was suggested to von Neumann by S. M.  Ulam.    See Theory 
of Self-Reproduaing Automatat p.  94, where von Neumann gives his own reasons 
for shifting from the kinematic to the cellular model of self-reproduction. 
Though he does not mention it,  he was probably also influenced by his interest 
in obtaining high speeds of computation by parallelism.] 
A cellular system constitutes  a basic framework or "space" in which automaton 
events  can take place.    Moreover, one can formulate precise and simple rules 
governing the operation of the system.    In this section we will explain the 
general concept of a cellular system.    In Sections    3-10 we will define the 
specific 29-state cellular system that von Neumann worked with, and show in 
a general,  intuitive way how finite automata, Turing machines, and self- 
reproducing automata can be constructed in this  system.     In Section 11 we 
will compare von Neumann's kinematic and cellular models of self-reproduction, 
and in Section 12 we will make some general remarks about the investigation 
of cellular systems. 
Cellular automata are the main theme of the essays collected in Essays 
in Cellular Automata.    They are also called tessellation automata and 
iterative circuit computers. 
Tie notion of a cellular automaton is built up in the following way. 
We begin with a cellular space, which consists of an infinite n-dimensional 
space together with a neighborhood relation defined on this space.    The 
neighborhood relation gives,  for each cell,  a finite  list of cells which 
are its neighbors.     The time basis of the system is  synchronous, with t  = 0, 
1,   2,   3,   ... 
A aellular automaton system  (or "cellular system," for short)   is 

=== PAGE 14 ===

mm 
8 
specified by giving a finite list of states  for each cell, a distinguished 
state (called the "blank state"), and a rule which gives the state of a 
cell at time t + 1 as a function of its own state and the states of its 
immediate neighbors at time t.    We will call the list of states for a 
cell together with the rule governing the state transition of the cell a 
transition function.    The distinguished state corresponds to the blank 
state of a square of a computing machine tape,  and it is required of a 
transition function that if a cell and its neighbors are in the blank 
state at time t, the cell is in the blank state at time t + 1. 
Thus a cellular automaton system consists of a cellular space and a 
transition function defined over that spac^.    A cellular automaton state 
is specified by a finite list of cells together with the cell state 
assigned to each,  it being understood that all other cells are in the 
blank state.    It follows inductively from the finitistic character of 
a transition function that each cellular automaton state is succeeded by 
a cellular automaton state.    A oellular automaton consists of a cellular 
automaton system together with an assigned initial state  (state at t  =0). 
In most of the cellular systems we will discuss, the neighborhood 
relation and transition function are the same over the whole space.    But 
the intent is to allow variations from cell to cell, provided that the 
neighborhood relation and transition function of any cell is calculable 
from its coordinates. 
[One could also allow neighborhood relations and transition functions 
which change over time,  as Holland does in his concept of path-building 
in iterative circuit computers.] 
It follows that the state of a cellular automaton at time t + 1 is 
calculable from its state at time t. 

=== PAGE 15 ===

The preceding definitions are actually for the deterministic case. 
A deterministic transition function yields a unique next state for each 
cell, and a detemdnistio oellular automaton   has a single initial state, 
so that a deterministic cellular automaton has a unique history through 
time.    An indeterndnistio oellular automaton may have more than one 
initial automaton state,  and its transition function yields a set of 
possible next states for a cell.    A probabilistia cellular automaton is 
an indeterministic cellular automaton with a probability distribution over 
the initial automaton states and with a probability distribution over the 
possible next states of each cell. 
A transition function is equivalent to a finite automaton which is 
located in the cell and receives inputs from the neighboring cells via 
unit delays.    The finite automaton located in a cell is deterministic, 
indeterministic,  or probabilistic according to the nature of the 
transition function. 

=== PAGE 16 ===

10 
[See Burks and Wright, "Sequence Generators and Digital Computers," 
pp.   153,   193-197.] 
3.     VON NEUMANN'S  CELLULAR SYSTEM 
We will discuss the general case again in Secion 12. Until then we 
will restrict our attention to von Neumann's specific cellular automaton 
system. It is based on a two-dimensional cellular space of square cells 
in which each cell has as neighbors the four cells with which it shares 
boundaries; see Figure 1. Each cell is capable of 29 different states; 
see Figure 2. The transition function is deterministic, and is the same 
for every cell of the space. 
We proceed now to describe the transition function of von Neumann's 
29-state cellular system.    He called the blank state the "unexcitable 
state" (UJ, because in his system a single pulse is not sufficient to 
excite it.     It is represented in our diagrams either by a blank or by 
cross-hatching  (as in Fig.  7).    For expository purposes we will divide 
the remaining 28-states into subsets,  so we can treat the automaton occu- 
pying each cell  as a set of nine basic elements or circuits  (as  in Fig.  3), 
together with control processes  for creating any of these elements from 
U and for reducing any of these elements to U.    There is one confluent 
element  (C),  four ordinary transmission elements  (->,   +, -•-,  •(•),  and four 
special transmission elements  (-», A,   <=» v).    Each transmission element 
has a quiescent  (passive, no-pulse,  zero) state and an excited  (active, 
"pulse," one)  state; the confluent element has a quiescent state and 
three active states.    Thus the nine basic elements require only 20 
different states. 

=== PAGE 17 ===

11 
The control processes are of two kinds.    The constructive process 
converts an unexcitable state into a passive confluent or transmission 
element, employing as intermediaries some transient (sensitized)  states. 
The destructive process converts a confluent or transmission element into 
an unexcitable state.    The complete set of 29-states and a summary of the 
transition rule is given in Figure 15. 

=== PAGE 18 ===

«BMH! 
12 
4.  CONFLUENT AND TRANSMISSION STATES 
The confluent element C has four states.  It performs the functions 
of conjunction, double-delay, and wire-branching. The four states are 
the four on-off combinations of the two delay units; no states are allo- 
cated to specify input or output directions, since these are determined 
by the contents of the four bordering cells in the following way. A 
confluent element receives inputs from all ordinary transmission elements 
whose outputs are directed toward it. It transmits an output (after two 
units of delay) to all ordinary and all special transmission elements in 
contiguous cells provided that the outputs of these elements are not 
directed toward it. Cells Al and 52 of Figure 3 contain confluent elements, 
They arc shown in Figure 3a as constructions of switches, and delays 
(whose initial outputs are zero) and in Figure 3b in abbreviated notation. 
The notation "C" does not indicate the specific state of the confluent 
element at any time. This is shown by subscripts when needed; for example, 
"CQI" indicates that the present output state is zero (0) and the next 
output state is one (1). The four confluent states are thus £oo» £oi» 
ClO' and ^ii- 
There are four ordinary transmission elements, ■+, + ,■*•,+,  one for 
each output direction. An ordinary transmission element performs the 
functions of disjunction and unit delay, and has two states. A right- 
directed ordinary transmission element is shown in celli42of Figure 3, 
a left-directed ordinary transmission element is shown in cell Bl . The 
number and direction of inputs to an ordinary transmission element are 
specified by the contents of the four neighboring cells. An ordinary 
transmission element receives disjunctively from all contiguous cells not 
in its output direction which contain either ordinary transmission elements 

=== PAGE 19 ===

rr 
13 
whose outputs are directed toward it or confluent elements.  An ordinary 
transmission element in cell a transmits to the neighboring cell $ in its 
output direction if either cell ß contains a confluent element or if ß 
contains an ordinary transmission element not directed toward a. 
Each of these ordinary transmission elements has two states, a 
quiescent (passive, no-pulse, zero) state, and excited (active, pulse, 
one) state. When the state is to be indicated, the former is shown by 
a plain arrow, the latter by an arrow with a dot beside it. 
There are four special transmission elements,♦, |. '•s j|> one for 
each output direction. Internally, special transmission elements operate 
in the same way as ordinary transmission elements, but their relations to 
other elements are different, especially with respect to the destruction 
process (Sec. 5). A special transmission element receives disjunctively 
from all contiguous cells (not in its output direction) which contain 
either confluent elements or special transmission elements whose outputs 
are directed toward it. A special transmission element transmits to the 
neighboring cell in its output direction only if this cell contains a 
special transmission element not directed toward it.  In Figure 4, an 
ordinary transmission pulse into input a at time t   will produce two 
special transmission pulses from output b,  one at time t+ 5 and the other 
at time t + 9. 
Each special transmission element has two states, the quiescent and 
the excited. When these are to be indicated, the quiescent state is 
represented by a plain double-arrow, while the excited state is represented 
by a double arrow with a dot beside it. See Figure 15. 
We have now explained how the confluent and transmission elements of 
the system operate, except for the construction and destruction processes. 
We will next show how these elements may be used to construct some organs. 

=== PAGE 20 ===

14 
5.  SOME COMPUTER ORGANS 
A useful method of operation in a cellular automaton is to convert a 
pulse into a binary sequence of pulses and spaces, transmit the sequence, 
and then decode it. This may be accomplished by means of the following 
two organs. 
A pulser  is an organ which converts a single pulse into a specific 
pulse-space sequence. The method of operation is clear from Figure 5. 
When supplied with a single input pulse at time t  this pulser will produce 
the sequence 10101 from its output at times t + 10 through t  + 14. The 
input pulse is sent along three paths of varying temporal lengths; these 
paths are merged disjunctively to produce the sequence 10101. 
A decoder produces a single output pulse if the sequence it receives 
has pulses in certain specified positions. The method of operation is 
clear from Figure 6. This decoder produces an output pulse if and only 
if the input sequence is 10101 or a sequence which "covers" 10101 (i.e., 
which has a "1" in its first, third, and fifth positions). The technique 
is again that of diverging and merging paths, but here the paths are 
merged conjunctively (at confluent elements) rather than disjunctively, 
so that unless pulses appear at certain places in the input sequence, 
there will be no output pulse. 
It is clear that there is an algorithm which, when given any finite 
binary sequence, will design both a pulser and a decoder for that sequence. 
The decoder does not recognize only its defining sequence, but that 
sequence or any sequence which "covers" it. Thus the decoder of Figure 6 
produces an output for any of the sequences 10101, 11101, 10111, and 11111. 
One can construct a recognizer which recognizes only its defining sequence; 
MHi 

=== PAGE 21 ===

15 
see Section 5 and Figure 14 below. Alternatively, one can use sets of 
sequences such that no sequence of the set covers any other one, so that 
decoders are sufficient for recognizing sequences. This technique is used 
in the coded channel, which is described next. 
There is no wire-crossing primitive in von Neumann's system. Two 
kinds of wire-crossing units may be synthesized. The first is a coded 
ahannel  which has any number of associated inputs and outputs. A single 
pulse (one) fed into an input will later appear at the corresponding 
output or outputs, provided that no other input is stimulated during the 
operation of the coded channel. Thus the coded channel can cross any 
(finite) number of wires or channels, provided that only one input is 
used at a time. The coded channel cannot cross two continuous streams 
of signals (ones and zeros) without interference. This can be done by 
a "real time" crossing organ, which will be described in a moment. 
The principle of a coded channel may be explained in connection with 
Figure 7. There are inputs a.,  a2, a,, and outputs fc, , i , J»,; each input 
a.  is associated with the corresponding output (or outputs) b..    Thus a 
pulse into input a   will eventually appear at both h    outputs (not simul- 
taneously) and nowhere else. The coded channel is made up of seven pulsers 
and seven decoding organs (all shown in reduced size), together with a 
"main channel" running from the output of pulser ^(10011) to the input of 
decoder D(11001). A long arrow represents a sequence of ordinary trans- 
mission states. 
The coding for this particular coded channel is done with six sequences 
of length five such that none of these sequences bitwise implies (is covered 
by) any other. The sequences 11100, 11010, 11001, 10110, 10101, 1001.1 are 
associated with a , a , a . b.3 b , b ,  in that order. The way the sequences 

=== PAGE 22 ===

16 
operate is best explained by means of an example.  Suppose input a2 
is  stimulated. This will cause pulser ^(11010) to inject its defining 
sequence 11010 into the main channel. This sequence will travel to the 
end of the main channel, but because it is distinct from every other 
sequence used it will affect only decoder 0(11010).  D(11010) will then 
send a pulse to pulser P(10101), which will inject 10101 into the main 
channel. The sequence 10101 will travel to the end of the main channel, 
but because it differs from every other sequence used it will affect only 
the two decoders £(10101), both of which will emit pulses from their 
outputs b2- 
The inputs and outputs of the coded channel may be positioned in any 
order. It is because of this that two sequences are associated with each 
input-output pair, the conversion from one sequence to its mate taking 
place at the top of Figure 7. 
The inputs to the coded channel must be spaced sufficiently far apart 
in time to avoid corruption or cross talk. For suppose ai and <7 were 
stimulated so their outputs 11100 and 11010 followed each other immediately 
in the main channel. The combined sequence 1110011010 contains the 
sequence 11001 which is assigned to input a^,  and hence which would 
operate 0(11001) and eventually cause an output at £3. 
The second kind of wire-crossing is the real-time crossing organ of 
Figure 8. 
[This organ was designed by J. E. Gorman.] 
Recall that a dot beside an arrow signifies that the transmission element 
is in the active state at some temporal reference point. Thus this organ 
contains five clocks, each producing an alternating sequence of zeros and 
ones; these sequences are used to gate the signals being crossed. 

=== PAGE 23 ===

17 
The crossing organ operates as follows. Consider first the behavior 
of the crossing organ when the inputs aj and a2 are 000 ... The clocks 
send alternate zeros and ones into both inputs of each of the six confluent 
states Cd, C6, F3, F6, El,    and #5.  The phasing of the ones (i.e., pulses) 
as they enter these confluent cells is indicated in Figure 8a by dashed and 
dotted lines. A dashed line signifies a one (pulse) at every even time 
(t _> 4) and a dotted line signifies a one (pulse) at every odd time (t .> 3). 
It is clear from Figure 8a that the two sequences arriving at a confluent state 
are out of phase. The function of these clock sequences is to gate the 
sequences coming into a^ and 0.2  so that they can cross each other. 
The sequence %$, i^, iz, i$,  H, ^5, ... entering a^  is split into two 
sequences by the confluent cell A4.    The clocks insert ones into every 
even position of the upper sequence and into every odd position of the lower 
sequence.  The odd bits -, iy,  -,  £3, -, t5, ... are allowed by the gating 
pulses to pass along row 3 and out at h^,  while the even bits i^,  -, ^2,  -,  ^i+i 
are allowed by the gating pulses to pass along row 6 and out at fcj. Similarly, 
the sequence JQ, ji, J2>  J3» j\> Js>   ••• entering 02 is split, with the even 
bits jo, -, J2» -» jit» -> ••• traveling up column C  and the odd bits 
-> 01,  -> J3>  -> J5>   ••• traveling up column F.    The phasing of the whole 
system is such that the sequence j0, -, j2, -, J.,  -, ... is interleaved with 
^0 » -1 ^23  ->  i-h*  -» ••• at cel1 c6  and with -, i.,  -, i3, -, i5,   ... at 
cell C3.    Likewise, the sequence -, jj, -, J3, -, J5, ... is interleaved 
with io,  -, ^2. -. H> ->   ••• at cel1 ^ ancl with -, i1,  -,  t3, -, i5, ... 
at cell F3.    For example, the sequences entering and leaving cell C6  are: 
From the left: 0 0 1 0 1 i0 1 t2 1 ik  ... 
From below:    0 0 0 1 JQ  I j2 I j\ 1 ... 
Output:       0 0 0 0 0 0 j0 i0 j2 i2 jH ik   ... 
The sequences from cells C3  and F3  are combined in cell El  to give the output 

=== PAGE 24 ===

18 
Jg. J > J  ,   •••  delayed 15 units of time. Similarly, the sequences from 
cells F3  and F6  are combined in cell H5  to give the output ig» M» ^2» ••• 
delayed 15 units of time. In this way information passes from aj to i^ and 
from a    to b    without any cross interference. 2    2 ' 
This concludes our examples of organs synthesized from ordinary trans- 
mission elements and confluent elements alone.  It should be noted that the 
operation of these elements depends in an essential way upon their context, 
i.e., upon the contents of neighboring cells. Whether a confluent or trans- 
mission element receives information from or transmits information to a 
neighboring cell depends upon what is in that cell. See, for example. 
Figure 5. The ordinary transmission element of cell A2  receives only from 
the ordinary transmission element of cell AS,  and hence functions only as 
a unit delay. In contrast, the ordinary transmission element of cell El 
receives from both cell Dl  and cell E2,  and hence is a disjunction ("or") 
element as well as a unit delay. In Figure 6, the confluent element C6 
operates as a wire-branching element, feeding C5  and D6,  while the confluent 
element El  operates as a conjunction ("and" element), producing an output 
(with two units of delay) only when it is stimulated by both Dl  and E2. 

=== PAGE 25 ===

rr 
19 
6.  CONSTRUCTION AND DESTRUCTION 
Twenty-one states so far described (one unexcitable, four confluent, 
eight ordinary transmission, and eight special transmission) are not suf- 
ficient to generate all switching functions. The switching functions 
realized by these primitives are all "positive" in the sense that they carry 
zeros into zeros (quiescence into quiescence). Now, a negation element 
converts a passive input (quiescence, zero) into an active output (excited, 
one). Consequently, a negation element cannot be synthesized from the twenty- 
one states described so far. 
We could add a negation element to the list of primitives, but there 
are two reasons not to do so if it can be avoided. First, it would increase 
the number of states beyond twenty-nine. Second, when construction and 
self-reproduction take place in a cellular automaton it is desirable that 
the constructed automaton be completely passive, otherwise the automaton 
being constructed may start its own construction-destruction processes and 
thereby interfere with its construction. Moreover, we can obtain the effect 
of negation as a by-product of the destruction and construction processes 
which are needed anyhow. 
There are two of these processes. The aonatruotion process (von Neumann 
called it the "direct process") transforms the unexcitable state into any 
of the nine passive forms Cgg, ■*,   t, <-, +, =*•, f|, «=, using the eight 
"sensitive" or transient states SQ,  §0 , Sl> .§00, S01 , S10, S^, S000 as 
intermediaries. The destruction process  (von Neumann called it the "reverse 
process") transforms both passive and active forms of the confluent, ordinary 
transmission, and special transmission states back into the unexcitable 
state in a single time step. 
Ordinary and special transmission states operate the same way in the 
■MM! 

=== PAGE 26 ===

20 
construction process. Consider a cell a which is in the unexcitable state 
and which has one or more immediate neighbors which contain transmission 
elements directed toward it. The construction process is defined by the 
tree of Figure 9, where a "1" means that at least one of the transmission 
elements directed toward the cell a is active. A pulse is required to 
start the process; after it is started the process continues until cell 
a is in one of the passive states £, -►, +, ■«-, 4-, ^>, A, *=, ||. Consider, 
for example, Figure 10, where the sequences 1101 and 1010 are supplied 
to cells A2  and B3.  The disjointed sequence is 1111; it carries cell 52 
through this sequence: U, S0, Si, ^n, £00. 
The reason for having both special and ordinary transmission states 
is that they play opposite roles in the destruction process. A pulse 
from an ordinary transmission state into a cell containing a special 
transmission state changes the latter to an unexcitable state in one 
time step. Similarly, a pulse from a special transmission state into a 
cell containing either an ordinary transmission state or a confluent 
state transforms that cell into an unexcitable state. These destruction 
pulses override any pulses used for communication and computation. In 
Figure 11, a pulse into input a  at time t  will enter cell Dl  at time 
t + 4 and cell A2  at time t + 5 so these cells will contain unexcitable 
elements at times t + 5 and t + 6  respectively. 
Note that the destruction process is effective on both the active 
and passive forms of the nine elements (£,-> , +, ■*-,  +, =*», A, •S=,J|). 
The initial configuration of a cellular automaton may contain the active 
as well as the passive forms of these elements; indeed, it may contain 
any of the 29 states. On the other hand, the construction process leads 
only to the passive forms of the nine elements (C, -> , + , -«- , + , =*, A, «*», |) 
that is, only to 9 different states. 

=== PAGE 27 ===

21 
Next we will illustrate how the destruction and construction processes 
may be used to synthesize negation. Figure 12 shows a periodic pulser 
which, when started, emits the sequence 10101 until it is turned off. 
It consists of a pulser which produces the desired sequence (10101) when 
it is stimulated by a start pulse, a repeater (cells A4, 84, AS, B5)  which 
repeats the sequence until it is turned off, a pulser which produces a 
sequence 11111 when stimulated by a stop pulse, and a transducer (cells 
A2,  Bl, B2, 33)  by means of which the repeater is turned off. The sequence 
10101 enters repeater cell A4  and cycles around the cells 34, BS, AS, A4, 
and also out of cell 34  to the right, indefinitely. These four cells have 
a total delay of five units. The stop pulse produces a sequence 11111 which 
passes down channel 31-32-33  and enters cell 34.    The first pulse kills 
C to U and the next four restore l^ to £00 v^a t'ie sequence of sensitized 
states Sg S.j S.., and S..., the last being CQQ- This erases the sequence 
10101 in the repeater and leaves the repeater in its original state. 
It is clear that there is an algorithm which, when given any finite 
sequence, will design a periodic pulser for that sequence. Larger output 
sequences will require longer killing sequences, and the length of the 
erasing sequence must be a multiple of five, so that the confluent cell 
(B4) feeding the output is left in its original state at the end of the 
stop operation. 
A periodic pulser whose output is a repeated 1 is a binary storage 
element or "flip-flop". Since the minimal cell cycle consists of four 
cells and a delay of five, it must be designed to produce a sequence of 
length five or longer. Figure 13 shows a periodic pulser which produces 
the sequence 11111 until it is turned off, together with a gate (confluent 
element). When PP(lllll) is on, it sends a constant stream of pulses 

=== PAGE 28 ===

«WBIUffS' 
22 
to the gate, and the signals recieved at the gate input are transmitted 
to the gate output. When the PP(lllll) is off, the gate is closed. 
The method used for erasing sequences in periodic pulsers can also 
be employed in recognizers. It will be recalled that a decoder responds 
not only to its defining sequence, but also to any sequence which "covers" 
its defining sequence. Thus the decoder D(10101) responds to any of the 
sequences 10101, 11101, 10111, and 11111. In contrast, a recognizer 
responds only to its defining sequence. 
The underlying operating principle of a recognizer may be explained 
in connection with an example. Figure 14 shows a recognizer R^(101001). 
Every input sequence is fed to a decoder 0(101001), which produces an 
output pulse for any one of the eight sequences l,a^,l,a^,a^,l, 
(where x t x t x =■(), 1}.    Since we want a final output only for 
x - x   = x   = 0, we need to detect when any of x , x , x   are one. 12   3 12    3 
This is done by a pulser P(1101), provided that the timing is correct. 
Hence if there is an output from 0(101001) and none from J^(1101), we want 
a final output from b;  while if there is an output from WlOlOOl) and also 
from P(1101), we do not want a final output from b.    The arrangement of 
Figure 14 provides this. If there is an output from D(101001) and none 
from P(1101), a pulse leaves cell Gland  zig-zags down rows 1 and 2 to 
exit at b.    But if there is an output from £(1101) in the right phase with 
respect to   the output of J3(101001), the confluent element in cell J5 
will stimulate the pulser JP(11111), whose purpose is to block the output 
at cell fl.    The pulser P(1101) will respond to any input pulse, of course, 
but the delay-length of the path from input a through 0,(101001) to the 
confluent cell IS1, relative to the delay-length of the path from input a 
through P(1101) to the same confluent cell J5, is such that P(lllll) is 

=== PAGE 29 ===

23 
stimulated only when x^ x2j or a^ is one. The output sequence 11111 from 
the pulser P (Hill) cycles Tl  from C through U, Sfi, S,, S,,, S,, and back 
to CQQ. Consider the two paths from the output of D(1Ö1001) to the final 
output b of the recognizer, one along rows 1  and 2,  the other through P(lllll). 
The timing along these paths is such that an output from D(101001) is blocked 
at cell Tl  if and only if xi  or xz  or X3 is 1. Hence the recognizer ^(10101) 
produces a final output for the sequence 10101 but not for any sequence 1, 
Xj, 1, x2,  x3, 1, where x^  or #2 or x3 ^s  1' 
We have now finished our description of the deterministic transition 
function governing von Neumann's 29-state cellular automaton system. We 
will next formulate and answer some specific questions concerning the 
logical powers of this system. 
7.  FINITE AUTOMATA 
Finite automata are important in their own right, and constitute the 
bases of Turing machines, so we will first show how they can be embedded 
in von Neumann's cellular automaton system. 
A finite automaton is a device or system <I, V, 0, T",  X, dn>  which 
operates deterministically as follows. At each discrete moment of time 
(0, 1, 2, ...) it is in one of a finite set V of internal (delay) states, 
receives any one of a finite set I of input states, and transmits any one 
of a finite set 0  of output states. At time zero the automaton is in some 
distinguished internal state d*.    Its transition from state to state is 
governed by a function T from inout state and internal state to internal 
state; T is called its transition function. The automaton's output state 
is governed by a function X from internal state and output state to output state; 
X is called the "output function". An example is given in Figure 16a. 

=== PAGE 30 ===

24 
[This conception is used in Burks and Wright, "Theory of Logical Nets", 
p.  1364, but without the various states being named.  It is given in Moore, 
"Gedanken-Experiments in Sequential Machines", p.  133 and Burks and Wang, 
"The Logic of Automata", p.  203.] 
To represent a finite automaton in von Neumann's cellular system, 
one marks off a finite area of the cellular space, specifies the states 
of the cells of this area so as to make a device which simulates the 
automaton, and sends inputs into and takes outputs from the device across 
the boundary of this area. 
[More generally, our original definition of a cellular automaton system 
(Sec.  2) can be extended to include finite cellular spaces with inputs 
and outputs along the border.] 
Finite automata embedded in this cellular system cannot in general operate 
as fast as finite automata in the pure or idealized sense. This is so 
because the finite automaton of each cell is of limited capability (having 
only 29-states), and there is at least a unit delay across the boundary of each 
cell.   But finite cellular automata can simulate idealized finite automata. 
In the terminology introduced later,  for each idealized finite automaton 
there is a finite cellular automaton which is computationally equivalent 
to it, but not in general behaviorally equivalent to it  (See Holland, 
"Hierarchical Language").  In the following discussion we will assume 
that the time-scale is slowed as much as is needed for the simulation. 
For a fuller discussion of simuldtion speeds see especially Section 12 
below. 
In embedding a finite automaton in a cellular system there is a choice 
as to how inputs and outputs are represented. We will assume given a finite 
automaton,  <  I> P, (? > YJ  ^   dn>   w^th its input states coded as sequences. 

=== PAGE 31 ===

25 
each successive sequence starting at  time kt + m,  where k and m are  integers 
to be chosen on the basis of the time-delays of the simulating cellular automaton 
The given finite automaton can be simulated in von Neumann's cellular 
system in the manner of Figure 16.    Each input state i t I is represented 
by a recognizer R(^) which produces a single pulse when the sequence 
representing  input  state'   I is received as   input.   Each internal state 
d e P is represented by a periodic pulser PP(11111), which is turned 
on to represent the given finite automaton being in state di  initially 
the periodic pulser representing d    is turned on.    Each output state o 
represented by a pulser P(0) which produces, when stimulated,  a sequence 
to represent 0.    The transition function and output function are rep- 
resented by confluent elements functioning as  gates  ("and" elements), 
to detect coincidences between periodic pulsers representing internal states 
and pulses representing input states.  The outputs of the coincidences 
go to produce the desired output state,  and,  if a new internal state is 
called for,  to turn off the PP(lllll)  representing the new input state. 
All these organs  are interconnected by means  of a coded channel. 
(The cellular automaton design described here is that of the decoded 
normal form net,   Burks  and Wang,  "The  Logic of Automata", p.   281.   A 
variant of the simulation method of Figure  16 is described in von Neumann's 
Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata,  Sec.   5.1.3.) 
We will  explain the operation of this device for two cycles.   Suppose 
the system represents  external state   d   when a sequence representing  I 
is received,   followed   (after a suitable delay), by an input representing 
-^•1  .    The sequence representing    iy will be recognized by R(^o)> which 
will  send a pulse into the coded channel  at CZQ.     This will exit  at both the 
upper and lower b0  exits, having an effect  only   in the first case.   At 

=== PAGE 32 ===

26 
the upper exit it will pass through the conjunction ("and" switch) gated 
by the upper PP(lllll), and will enter the coded channel at a ,  exiting a 
i and stimulating P(0o) t0 produce the output sequence representing output 
state ^o- Thus internal state "0and input state ^l produce output state 
Ooand next internal state ^Q. 
After the simulation of this transition is finished, the sequence 
representing ^l will be received and will be recognized by R^ ), which 
will send a pulse into the coded channel at a . This will exit at both 
the upper and lower b    exits, again having an effect only in the first case. 
Here it will pass through the "and" gate and enter the coded channel at 
a    (to exit at b    and start the internal state^ 1  at a (to exit at h 
and stop the internal state ^ ), and a (to exit at b    to simulateJP(Ö) 
to produce the output sequence representing 0 ). Thus the internal state 
^ and input state :    produce output state 0    and the next internal state 
In this cellular simulation of a finite automaton each successive input 
sequence starts at the time kt  + m;    the integer m  of the formula kt + m 
can be zero, but k  must be chosen so that in the worst case the system 
can change its representation of the present internal state before the 
representation of the next internal state enters the system. The sequences 
representing output states will start at times kt  + n,  where n  is an integer 
depending on the transit time of the simulating system. 
The foregoing should suffice to show that any finite automaton can be 
simulated in von Neumann's cellular system, given a suitable representation 
and timing of input and output states. Actually, a considerably stronger 
result is inherent in the foregoing construction. For with the exception 
of the periodic pulser PP(lllll) which represents internal state "Q 

=== PAGE 33 ===

27 
all of the cells of the automaton of Figure 16 are initially quiescent. 
Moreover,  this automaton can be modified so that this PP(lllll)  is  initially 
quiescent and is started by a pulse injected into the automaton from the 
outside.    This leads to the following definition. 
An initially quiescent automaton is a finite area of the cellular 
structure,   every cell of which is  in one of the ten quiescent states J,], 
->,   tj  •<-,   •l-,=s>i A. **=, |1,  and £    .     It is easy to arrange for an initially 
quiescent automaton to be started by a stimulus at its periphery, and we 
will assume that this is done. 
The method of construction illustrated in Figure 16 shows that the 
following is the case.    For every finite automaton,  there is an initially 
quiescent aellulav automaton whiah aan simulate it. 
It should be noted that the crossing organ of Figure 8 is not initially 
quiescent,   since it contains five "clocks"  (Fig.  8b) which must be operating 
before it can operate.    Moreover,  one of these clocks is in the center,  so 
that the crossing organ cannot be started by a stimulus on its periphery. 
In this respect the coded channel  is  superior to the real time crossing 
organ. 
(One can use a real time crossing organ in an in an initially quiescent 
automaton in the following way.    Construct the quiescent part of the crossing 
organ,  except for a path to the center clock.    Then add pulsers to 
complete the construction and start the organ.    The starting stimulus 
to the whole automaton must stimulate these pulsers, which then complete 
and start  the crossing organ.    See von Neumann,  Theory of Self-Reproduaing 
Automata,   pp.   264-5.) 
There  is another method of simulating an arbitrary finite automaton, 
which involves constructing only one  finite automaton.    This method is to 

=== PAGE 34 ===

T^ 
28 
construct or embed a universal Turing machine in the cellular system. 
Since a universal Turing machine can simulate any automaton,  a fortiori, 
it can simulate a finite automaton,     toreover,  when it  simulates  a finite 
automaton it need use only a finite amount of its  tape,  and hence is 
also a finite automaton. 
We will sketch the construction of a universal Turing machine 
in Section 8.     It turns out that the most efficient method of operating 
the tape involves a constructing arm which can be used  for general 
construction purposes as  well as part of a tape unit.     We therefore 
explain this constructing arm next. 
8.     CONSTRUCTING ARM 
The constructing arm is used both for the process of construction 
(see Fig.   17)  and for operating an indefinite tape   (see Fig.   18).    We 
will  first explain how it   is used to construct  a  finite,   initially 
quiescent automaton. 
The general arrangement   is  shown in Figure   17.     Appropriate sequences 
of ordinary pulses are generated in the constructing device and fed into 
the input s   (through a confluent state C)  and the  input o of the con- 
structing arm.    These signals  cause the head of the constructing arm 
to sweep backwards and downwards over the area a  -   ß,   leaving each cell 
of this  area in the desired state. 
The construction is  carried out by the head of the construction 
arm,  shown in Figure 18a  in normal  form.    Signals  for construction 
and destruction are sent  alternately through the ordinary transmission 
elements and the special  transmission elements.    The constructing arm 
can be advanced either horizontally or vertically.     It can also be 

=== PAGE 35 ===

29 
retracted either horizontally or vertically, leaving cells y and 6 
in any of the ten quiescent states U, Cloo » ->, +, *-, +, =*■, |, «*=, 1- 
The actual binary (pulse-no pulse) sequences needed for construction 
and destruction are derivable from Figures 9 and 15.  For purposes of 
comprehension, however, it is best to replace these sequences by a 
representation of their effects. We will explain this notation in 
connection with the passage from Figure 19a to Figure 19b. The starting 
configuration is given in Figure 19a.  The following sequences are fed 
into input s  or input s    via special transmission or confluent states: 
1110 changes cell Cl  from U to | 
1101   "     " C2      " U " **= 
1      "     " B2      " + " U 
" U " ->■ 
10000 II   DO 
The result is Figure 19b. Rather than writing this sequence as 
"1110 1101 1 10000", however, we write it as " (| U ". 
Figures 19 and 20 specify the sequences needed for advancing the 
constructing arm by one cell. Figures 21 and 22 specify the sequences 
needed for withdrawing the constructing arm and leaving two cells, 
Y, 5 in one of the ten quiescent states U, Gn , "* , ^ , "•" , + ,=^, jf. "*=, ||. 
The actual binary sequence needed for y  and 6 is obtained from Figures 
9 and 15, as before. 
Because construction proceeds from top to bottom and from right 
to left, the lower left hand corner is completed last.  It is therefore 
convenient to stipulate that an initially quiescent automaton be started 
by injecting a symbol into its left-most, lowest cell, from beneath. Figure 
23 shows how this is accomplished. 
This completes our discussion of the five operations of the con- 
structing arm: horizontal advance, vertical advance, horizontal retreat 

=== PAGE 36 ===

30 
with y-6,    vertical  retreat with y-&, and injection of the starting 
stimulus.    These operations suffice for the construction of any 
initially quiescent automaton in the first quadrant, assuming that the 
required sequences  are supplied to the input of the constructing arm. 
A crude way in which these sequences  can be obtained is by making 
the constructing device consist of a row of special transmission states 
feeding input s   (Fig.   17)  and a row of ordinary transmission states 
feeding input   o.   By choosing the proper sequence of quiescent and active 
states in each case,  one can obtain any  desired finite, binary  (pulse) 
sequence.    Since the automaton to be constructed is finite, the pulse 
sequences needed for its construction are also finite.    Consequently, 
for each finite initially quiescent automaton A there is a finite non- 
quiescent automaton B which will construct A. 
Of more interest is a constructing automaton which is itself initially 
quiescent.    Such an automaton will be discussed in Section 10.    But 
since it contains the essentials of a universal Turing machine, we will 
explain next how to embed a Turing machine  in von Neumann's cellular 
system. 
9.     UNIVERSAL COMPUTER 
A Turing machine consists of a finite automaton operating on an 
indefinitely extendable tape. 
[Turing,  "On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the 
Entscheidungsproblem." ] 
In the usual arrangement, the tape and the finite automaton move 
relatively to each other; usually the tape is viewed as moving back 
and forth past the finite automaton, but occasionally the finite automaton 
is viewed as moving back and forth along the tape.    In both cases the 

=== PAGE 37 ===

31 
information on the tape moves relative to the finite automaton.     In the 
cellular system both the tape and the finite automaton are  "by nature" 
at  rest,   so  it is best  to connect  them by a loop which can be extended 
or contracted. 
[One could embody the usual  arrangement by designing the  finite 
automaton so that it constructs  an indefinitely long shift  register 
(adding new stages as needed)   and shifts the information in the register 
back and forth.    This  is done in  Burks,   "The Logic of Fixed and Growing 
Automata"  and "Computation,   Behavior,  and Structure in Fixed and Growing 
Automata".] 
The arrangement is shown in  Figure 24.    The "tape"  itself consists 
of an infinite  linear array of cells  leading off to the right;  this is 
row 3  in the  figure.     "Zero"  is  represented by the unexcitable state  (U) 
and "one" by an ordinary transmission state directed downward   (I). 
In an initial  cell assignment  for the cellular system only a finite number 
of cells  are  in a state other than the unexcitable  (U),  so that initially 
(and hence also at any subsequent  time)  only a finite number of cells 
(squares)   of the tape will  register "one". 
The  following five tape operations are clearly sufficient  for all 
computational purposes:     reading,  writing "one" and  lengthening the 
reading  loop by one cell, writing  "zero" and lengthening,  writing "one" 
and shortening,  and writing "zero" and shortening. 
Reading is accomplished by means of the reading  loop,  which consists 
of rows  1}   column ^(including the cell under scan)  and row 4 of Figure 
24.     To read the contents of cell x  , we inject the sequence 10101 
into entry y.     This sequence passes  alon.   row 1  and down into cell x . 
There are now two cases  to consider.     If cell x    is  in U   (representing 
a "zero") ,   the sequence 1010 converts  it  into an ordinary transmission 

=== PAGE 38 ===

32 
State directed downward  (I),  and the  final  1 of the sequence  10101 
returns down row 4 and out exit w  .     If cell x    is in +  ,  the complete 
sequence 10101  returns down row 4 and out exit w .    Thus an output from 
w    of 2  indicates that x =U, while an output of 10101  indicates that 
x =1.    This readout procedure is destructive, since cell x    is  left  in n r n 
state ■*•  in either case  (Fig.   24b).    The old value of x    is restored, 
or a ne« value  is  inserted,  during the process of lengthening or shortening 
the reading loop. 
Changing the length of the reading  loop, and recording the new bit 
in cell x ,   is  accomplished by means of the constructing arm, which 
consists of rows I and 2 of Figure 24.     Note that row i  is part of the 
reading loop as well as part of the constructing arm.    The constructing 
arm used to modify the tape is the same as that used for construction 
(see the previous section),  except that the ordinary transmission 
elements are  located above  (rather than below) the special  transmission 
elements.    The routine for writing "one" in cell x    and lengthening the 
reading  loop  is  given in Figure 25,  where the notation of representing 
a binary sequence is represented by its  effects,  as before.     Note that 
modifications  in the bottom row of the unit are made through the cell 
x   before this  cell is left in its  final state; no other cell  of the 
tape is disturbed.    Note also that since "one" is represented by +   , the 
process ^f writing "one" and lengthening  (or shortening)  is the same as 
lengthening   (or shortening).  The other three cases  (writing "zero" 
and lengthening, writing "one" and shortening, and writing "zero" and 
shortening)  are handled similarly. 
In the process described by Figure 25, binary sequences are fed 
first into u  ,  then into v ,  into u again, and finally into v again. 

=== PAGE 39 ===

33 
The two successive sequences  into u can be combined into one long 
sequence by inserting zeros during the moments when input y is being 
used,  and similarly for the alternate sequences   into v.    Consequently, 
the operation of writing "one" and lengthening can be accomplished 
by feeding two long sequences  into u and y in parallel.    These sequences 
can be generated by two pulsers, one feeding input y and the other 
feeding input u. 
Let us now summarize the organs needed for our five tape operations. 
Four pulsers feeding u and four pulsers  feeding y are needed for the 
four operations of writing "zero"  (or"one")  and lengthening  (or shortening) 
One pulser 10101 feeding v is needed for reading cell x.. One recog- 
nizer is needed to recognize the sequence 00100   (i.e.,a;     =0 )    and 
another to recognize the sequence 10101   (i.e.,   x     =1  )> both of these 
n 
recieve the output  from w.    Thus nine pulsers and two recognizers are 
needed to operate the tape,  its reading loop,  and its construction arm. 
This completes our brief explanation of how to embed an indefinitely 
expandable tape in a cellular system, how to establish contact with 
an arbitrary square  (cell)  of the tape,  and how to read from and write 
in this cell. 
We now have the essential ingredients  for embedding a Turing machine 
in von Neumann's  cellular system.    In Section 7 we saw how to con- 
struct an arbitrary finite automaton in this system,  and we see now 
how to construct and use an arbitrarily  long tape.     It remains to 
combine these two entities. 
The general arrangement  is shown in Figure 26.     The operation of 
the tape, constructing arm  (for lengthening-shortening and writing), 
and reading loop have been explained.    This operation is directed 
by nine pulsers and two recognizers, which constitute part of the tape 

=== PAGE 40 ===

34 
control.    To obtain the rest of the tape control, we must add organs 
to control these pulsers on the basis of information received from 
the recognizers according to the particular finite automaton operation 
that  is desired.    Let " be the set of the internal states of the finite 
automaton controlling the tape.     Each internal state d z V  is represented 
by a periodic pulser PP(lllll),  as  in Figure 16.    At each stage one of 
these periodic pulsers is on;  the system starts operation when the 
periodic pulser representing the initial state J    is turned on and the 
pulser P(10101)  is stimulated to  inaugurate the reading cycle.    The 
outputs of the two recognizers representing x   = 0 and x   = 1 are gated 
via confluent cells against the outputs of the internal state periodic 
pulsers to determine the next operation.    According to the specific 
transition function x of the finite automaton being simulated,  a next 
state d z V  is selected, one of the four operations  lengthen-shorten 
and write "zero"-write "one" is selected, and after a suitable delay 
the pulser P(10101)  for reading the next tape square is stimulated. 
This whole sequence is iterated indefinitely. 
The foregoing sketch indicates  in a general way how,  given any 
Turing machine M , we can embed in the 29-state cellular structure 
an initially quiescent automaton which performs the same computations 
as    M.   Since this is so for any Turing machine,  it is a fortiori so for 
a universal Turing machine  (universal computer).    The full design for 
a universal Turing machine is given in Thatcher's "Universality in 
the von Neumann Cellular Model". 
(An earlier design is given in von Neumann's Theory of Self- 
Reproduoing Automata,  Part II, Chapters 3-5.) 

=== PAGE 41 ===

35 
Hence we conclude: For any given Turing maahine M (and hence for a 
universal Turing maahine M )3  there is an initially quiescent automaton 
in von Neumann's 29-state cellular automaton system which will perform 
the same computation as M (or M ).    As von Neumann expressed this 
result, his cellular space is "logically universal". 
The next step is to extend this result to obtain a corresponding 
result for universal construction. 
10.  UNIVERSAL CONSTRUCTOR AND SELF-REPRODUCTION 
Let us return for a moment to von Neumann's kinematic self-re- 
producing automaton.  In the kinematic system we start with an environ- 
ment containing an unlimited supply of computirg, kinematic, cutting, 
fusing, rigid, and sensing elements. We introduce into this environ- 
ment a constructing automaton which is itself composed of these parts 
and which contains an explicit plan of some desired automaton. The 
constructing automaton proceeds to collect parts and construct the 
desired automaton from these parts according to its explicit plan. 
It is instructive to view this whole process in terms of the 
states of the system. The original environment is more or less uniform, 
homogeneous, and unorganized. We introduce a constructing automaton 
containing the plan of a secondary automaton; this amounts to putting a 
finite area of the space (i.e., the space occupied by the constructing 
automaton and its plan) into a certain "state".  The constructing 
automaton then organizes another area or region of the space according 
to the plan of the secondary automaton; in other words, it puts a certain 
secondary area into the state specified by the plan. If the constructing 
automaton contains its own plan, the area of the secondary automaton 

=== PAGE 42 ===

Mi) Jü"" I, 
36 
is, at the end of the process, in the same state as the area of the 
constructing automaton was at the beginning of the process. This is 
self-reproduction in the kinematic model. 
The corrseponding situation on the cellular model is this. We 
begin with an infinite, uniform cellular system of 29-state automata, 
each automaton being in the unexcitable state U.  We then organize by 
fiat a finite area of this space so that the area constitutes a con- 
structing automaton which contains the plan of a secondary automaton; that 
is, we put a certain area into a certain state. The constructing automaton 
then sends out a constructing arm which organizes another area according 
to the plan of the secondary automaton; that is, it puts a certain 
secondary area into the state specified by its plan. If the constructing 
automaton contains its own plan, the state of the secondary area at the 
end of the process is the same as the initial state of the area occupied 
by the constructing automaton. This is self-reproduction in the cellular 
system. 
A universal constructor which is initially quiescent is shown in 
Figure 27. It is composed of two units, each consisting of a finite 
automaton and an indefinitely expandable part. The first unit is a 
tape unit, which can store information on, and read it from, an 
indefinitely extendable linear array of cells, or tape. The tape unit 
itself consists of two parts: a finite tape control; and an indefinitely 
long tape, together with its reading loop and constructing an», The tape 
unit is a kind of Turing machine; see Fig. 25. The second unit of 
the universal constructor is a constructing unit, which can carry out 
the construction of any quiescent automaton whose description is on 
the tape. The constructing unit also consists of two parts: a finite 
construction control, and an indefinitaly long constructing arm. 

=== PAGE 43 ===

37 
A description of the automaton to be constructed is stored in explicit 
form on the tape of the universal constructor. Under direction of the 
construction control, the tape control reads the description from the tape 
and transmits it to the construction control. Using this description, 
the construction control sends signals into the constructing arm to bring 
about the construction. 
The automaton to be constructed is to be initially quiescent, which 
means that it can be explicitly described by giving the desired quiescent 
state of each cell (y, +,  f, ^, +,=>■, A, .*=. |. 0T $00) •    T*16 limitation 
to in i :il y quiescent automata should be noted. There are finite con- 
figuration (areas of cells, each of which is in one of the 29-states) 
which are not initially quiescent and are nevertheless constructible. For 
example, one could easily construct a loop of active ordinary transmission 
elements, each of which feeds its successor. But there are also finite 
configurations (not initially quiescent) which are not constructible. A 
simple example is a sensitized state SQ surrounded by a band of cells 
in state C  . Since confluent states do not construct, this configuration •-«00 > e 
can exist only at time zero and hence is not constructible.    Another example 
is S surrounded by  (eight) cells  in state C^Q-    This can exist only at 
times 0,  1,   2, or 3,  and is not constructible. 
Moore and Myhill establish an interesting result related to construct- 
ibility in those cellular structures  in which information requires at least 
one time unit to pass from    a cell to any of its eight bordering cells. 
Von Neumann's 29-state cellular structure is clearly one of these structures. 
Moore speaks of a finite area of cells in some state  (i.e., with an ass- 
ignment of a state to each cell)  as a configuration, and calls a configuration 
which can exist only initially  (i.e.,  at time zero), a "Garden-of-Eden" 
configuration.    Since construction takes one or more time steps, every 

=== PAGE 44 ===

38 
Garden-of-Eden configuration is non-constructible. The converse is not the 
case, as our example of S„„„ surrounded by cells in state €„„ shows. Moore 
and Myhill establish a necessary and sufficient condition for existence of 
Garden-of-Eden configurations in cellular structures of the type they consider. 
The condition is essentially that the cellular structure be non-baakwards 
deterministic,  that is, that a given state of an area can be derived from 
two or more preceeding states. 
[The concept of backwards determinism is defined in Burks and Wang, 
The Logic of Automata,  Sec. 3.3.] 
Actually, one must modify this concept to take account of the influence 
of the environment on the edges of an area; Moore uses the term "erasable". 
Von Neumann's 29-state cellular structure is clearly not backwards determin- 
istic, for the configuration consisting of 4-^ surrounded by a wide band 
of U's leads to all U's (except at the edges), as does also a configuration 
consisting of all U's. 
Before leaving this topic we note that the restriction to initially 
quiescent automata is no restriction as far as computation (for either 
finite automata or Turing machines) is concerned. The fact that not all 
configurations can be constructed in von Neumann's cellular structure is 
analogous to the fact that not all finite automaton behaviors are realizable 
in the cellular structure, because of the limited capability of each cell 
together with the delay between cells. 
We return now to the task of designing a universal constructor. The 
following conventions may be adopted without any essential loss of generality. 
The constructed automaton is to occupy a rectangular area of width a and 
height S, where g is an even integer. The desired cell states are designated 
Ann '^m » *"• A      > anc* are t0 ^ arranged on the tape in reverse order 
from which they are to be used. The lower left-hand corner of the cor^tructed 

=== PAGE 45 ===

39 
automaton is to be located at point xQi  z/0. Moreover, the constructed 
automaton may be started by injecting a stimulus into cell x j y    from 
below (see Figure 23). The tape contents are then as follows: a period, 
the origin  point xQ, ij ;  the dimensions a, 3; an enumeration of the states 
of the cells X n , X , X , A.,,..., X       ; and a terminal asterisk. 00  10  ül  n      a-i , B-i 
The construction control must execute the following program or 
algorithm to construct the secondary automaton specified by the tape contents. 
(1) The construction control orders the value of x^  read and sends pulse 
sequences into the constructing arm for x * 2  horizontal advances. 
It then orders the values of y     and gread and sends pulse sequences 
into the constructing arm for z/ + 3 vertical advances. The head of 
the constructing arm is now in the upper right-hand corner of the 
construction area so that construction may begin. 
(2) The construction control then iterates the following operation ß/2 
times: 
(a) A horizontal advance of the constructing arm a-2 times 
(b) A horizontal retreat with construction of y and 6, for a-2 times, 
with the specification of y and 6 coming from the values of the ^'s 
stored on the tape. 
(c) A vertical retreat with construction of y and 6, for two times, 
with the specification of y and 6 coming from the appropriate 
A's stored on the tape. 
This completes the construction of the area ot-ß. 
(3) The construction control next orders a single horizontal retreat and 
then injects the starting signal into the left-most, lowest cell of 
the constructed automaton (see Fig. 23). Following this the constructing 
control executes y^   vertical retreats and then x + 2 horizontal 

=== PAGE 46 ===

40 
retreats tc return the constructing arm to its  initial position; 
in each of these retreats both   Y and 6  are to be blank  (U). 
This completes our sketch of the algorithm or program for the 
construction of an arbitrary finite initially quiescent automaton.    We 
have not gone into details on such matters as how the numbers x   ,^   , a , 
and   ßare represented on the tape and how the construction control keeps 
track of what it is doing.    While there are many such small problems,  there 
are standard ■»■ thods in the computer art for solving them. 
The construction control can be designed by translating this algorithm 
into a finite automaton,  and then designing a cellular automaton to 
simulate the resultant finite automaton, using the method given in Section 
6  (c.f.  Fig.   16). 
Since a standard Turing machnie consists of a finite automaton attached 
to a tape,  it is desirable to allow any automaton which is to be constructed 
to have these two parts,  and so we will provide for the following three 
cases. 
\,1)    Tae case already discussed,  to wit:    The quiescent automaton to 
be constructed is a finite rectangular machine M,     Its description Q (/u)   is 
placed on the tape of the universal constructor preceded by a period and 
followed by an asterisk,  as  in Figure 27.    The universal constructor reads 
V (M) and makes M, and then starts M by injecting a starting stimulus  into it 
at a standard position, 
(2)    Let the description VW  of the desired quiescent automaton M be 
placed on the tape of tne universal constructor,  followed by a diamond, 
followed by the contents T(A0 of the tape to be attached to M, followed by 
a concluding square.    The universal constructor will execute the description 
V (A0 and thereby construct machine M, as before.      Seeing the diamonrl, 
it will proceed to construct a tape with contents  TiM) and attach it to 

=== PAGE 47 ===

41 
M at some standard place; see Figure 28. More specifically, the tape will 
contain a period, followed by T (Af), followed by a concluding square. After 
the tape has been constructed, the constructing arm will return to the 
constructed automaton M and give it a starting signal. Note that the tape and 
its contents coistitute a quiescent automaton of rectangular shape, just as 
M   does, so that essentially the same technique can be used to construct a 
tape with contents T [M)  as was used to construct M  . The tape is a special 
case in that it is only one cell wide, and contains only the two states j^ 
and I. 
(3) As a special case of the preceding we will allow the description 
P 0/) to be copied into the tape of M.     For this operation, the following 
is placed on the tape of the universal constructor: a period, the description 
PCVJ . and a concluding square. The universal constructor executes V (M)  and 
lukos .'/, then makes a tape with the contents "period- V (Af) - square" by 
copying P (/•/), and finally starts machine M. 
Let the universal constructor be designated "A/ ". We then have the a 
following result concerning the construction universality of our cellular 
system. There aan be embedded in von Neumann's 29-state aellular automaton 
system a universal aonstruator li   with this ability:    for each initially 
quiescent automaton M with tape contents T (M)  there is a coded description 
V(M) of M such that,  when V(M) and    T(M) are placed on the tape attached to 
M ,  M   will construct M} will attach to M a. tape with contents T fM)3  and 
will activate M . 
Self-reproduction now follows as a special case. See Figure 29. 
Put the following on the tape of the universal constructor M  :    a period, 
P (A/ ), a square. The unviersal constructor executes P (Af ) and thereby 
constructs M ,   it next copies P (Af ) onto the tape of the newly constructed 
M  , and finally it activates the new M .    We began with M    and tape P (Af ). 

=== PAGE 48 ===

mg* 
42 
After the constructor is finished the cellular structure contains a second 
copy of M   and tape p (;./ ). This is automaton self-reproduction. Hence an 
automaton which reproduces itself can be embedded in von Neumann's 29-state 
cellular automaton system. Iterated construction and iterated self-reproduction 
can be achieved by obvious modificatiors of the universal constructor. 
This result is obviously substantial, but to express its real force 
we must formulate it in such a way that it cannot be trivialized. Consider, 
for example, a two state cellular system whose transition function takes 
a cell into state "one" when any of its neighbors is in state "one". Define 
an automaton to be any area, even a single cell. A cell in state "one" 
then "reproduces itself" trivially in its neighboring cells. Clearly, what 
is needed is a requirement that the self-reproducing automaton have some 
minimal complexity. This requirement can be formulated in a number of ways. 
We will do it by requiring that the self-reproducing automaton also be a 
Turing machine. 
Since a universal Turing machine or computer can be embedded in 
von Neumann's cellular system (Fig. 26), such a machine can easily be 
combined with the universal constructor. When the description of this 
combined machine is placed on its own tape, followed by a square, it 
will produce a copy of itself. Hence, there can he embedded in von Neumann's 
29-state aetlular automaton system a universal aonstmator-aomputev which 
is self-reproducing. 
We conclude that von Neumann's cellular automaton system is 
computation-universal, construction-universal, and self-reproductive. 
In this system, self-reproduction is a special case of construction, and 
construction and computation are similar activities. 

=== PAGE 49 ===

43 
11.  KINEMATIC AND CELLULAR SELF-REPRODUCTION 
A brief comparison of von Neumann's two kinds of self-reproducing 
automata may increase our understanding of them.  Both are automata, 
being composed of computer or computer-like primitives.  Both exist in 
environments made of the same elements as themselves, differing from 
their environment only in tha they are "organized", while the environment 
is not. 
The most basic and important difference between the kinematic and 
the cellular automata systems is in the treatment of motion. The primitive 
elements of the kinematic system are capable of motion, while each finite 
automaton of the cellular system is fixed to its cell and cannot move. 
[Myhill, in "The Abstract Theory of Self-Reproduation"J  discusses a 
system which combines features of both. ] 
The processes which are achieved in the kinematic system by means of motion 
are achieved in the cellular system by transmitting information from cell 
to cell so as to realize the desired change of state. For example, in the 
kinematic system a finite automaton is constructed by collecting the needed 
parts, moving them into position, and soldering them together, while in 
the cellular system a finite automaton is constructed by sending out a 
communication channel (the constructing arm) and changing the state of a 
cellular area by means of signals sent through this channel. The difference 
is brought out by observing that in the kinematic system, self-reproduction 
results from (is a special case of) organized motion, whereas in the cellular 
system, motion is a special case of self-reproduction.  To move an object in 
cellular space we "merely" make a copy of that object in the new location 
and then destroy the original. 

=== PAGE 50 ===

44 
As far as studies of logic and automata theory are concerned, the 
cellular system is superior to the kinematic system just because it does 
not include motion as a basic operation. Motion is not a proper object 
of study for logic, and as we noted in discussing von Neumann's passage 
from the kinematic to the cellular system, the motional aspects of the 
kinematic system complicate it from the point of view of logical analysis. 
Viewed abstractly, the processes of computation, self-reproduction, and action 
are changes in the state of a system. In both the kinematic and the 
cellular system we are only simulating these processes. Hence, the 
ability to represent states and changes in them is the important thing, 
not the type of entity (kinematic element versus cell) which possesses 
the state. Since the detailed analysis of self-reproduction is facilitated 
by the absence of motion from the cellular system, it is superior to the 
kinematic system for von Neumann's purposes. 
One minor difference between the two systems should be noted. The 
kinematic system has a random or probabilistic feature, while the c&llular 
system does not.  But randomness does not play an essential role in the 
kinematic system.  It is used only as a device for making all the parts 
accessible to a constructing automaton, and alternate schemes are possible. 
For example, the parts could be arranged systematically and the constructing 
automaton could move to the parts it needs. 
[Von Neumann did recognize the importance of probabilistic automata 
and felt that an adequate theory of automata should cover them as well 
as deterministic automata. He discussed the question "How can reliable 
systems be constructed from unreliable components?" at length (see Burks, 
"Toward a Theory of Atuomata Based on More Realistio Primitive Elements"), 
and he hoped ultimately to study self-reproduction and evolution in a prob- 
abilistic cellular system (Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata, p. 99).] 

=== PAGE 51 ===

45 
The remaining difference between the two automaton systems concerns 
the number of primitive elements in each. The cellular system has a single 
primitive, the finite automaton located in each cell, whereas the kinematic 
system has nine kinds of primitive elements, three elements which switch 
("and", "or", and "not"), and elements which delay, move (kinematic element), 
cut, join (fusing element), sense, and provide structure (rigid el&ment). 
This difference is not fundamental, however, because conceptually one could 
combine all of these into a single element capable of all functions. 
The various types of primitives of the kinematic system dö correspond 
to functions to be performed in the system, and it is instructive to see 
how these functions are performed in the cellular system. From this point 
of view the nine primitives fall into four distinct classes. 
First, the variable structures made possible by the rigid elements 
(girders) of the kinematic system are replaced by the underlying fixed 
structure of the whole cellular system. 
Second, the switch and delay functions performed by the computing 
elements of the kinematic system are performed by the 29-state automata 
located in the cells of the cellular system; each of these automata could 
itself be synthesized from these elements. The context of a cell (that is, 
the states of its immediate neighbors) is essential in determining what 
switching and delay functions a 29-state automaton is performing. Within 
appropriate contexts, the following comparisons are valid. The confluent 
states £ , C.    ,  C , C  perform the functions of conjunction, double-delay, 
and branching. The ordinary transmission states-*-,;*■ , "^ , •',', "^ , t, + ,"^ 
perform the functions of transmission, disjunction, and unit delay; these 
states can recieve from and transmit to the comfluent states. The special 
transmission states =s>, =*■, A, .A, ««=, <*=, ||, '§   also perform the functions 
of tr. nsmission, disjunction and delay, but while they can recieve from 

=== PAGE 52 ===

■ ■ ■ mucsBimr. 
46 
confluent states they cannot transmit to them. 
Von Neumann's kinematic and cellular computer elements have this in 
common: they are passive in the sense that they produce no output until 
stimulated. Consequently, negation can only be realized in the kinematic 
system if there is a source of pulses (a "clock") available, and negation 
is realized in the cellular system by means of the destructive ("killing") 
process. In other words, negation is not a primitive in either system 
and can only be synthesized by rather indirect means. Von Neumann wanted 
his computing primitives to have this characteristic so that the constructed 
automaton would remain quiescent during the construction process. He rec- 
ognized that a partly constructed automaton which was active could inter- 
fere with, and even prevent the completion of, the construction process. 
He thought there were interesting analogies here with the semantic paradoxes 
of mathmatical logic. 
[See Theory of Self-Reproduaing Automata,  pp. 121-126.] 
Third, let us consider how sensing is achieved in the cellular system. 
The content of a tape cell is sensed during the process of reading the 
tape (Sec. xy). What is actually sensed is whether the cell is in state 
U or in state ■*■; this difference is, of course, sufficient for purposes 
of storing information in the cell. The method is to send a sequence 10101 
around the reading loop and through the cell to be read (Fig. 24), and to 
note whether the output of the reading loop is 1 (in which case x    = U) or 
10101 (in which case x    = +). Not every state of a cell can be detected 
or sensed in the cellular system, but this makes no real difference to the 
computational or constructive powers of the system. 
Fourth and last, let us consider how the functions performed by the 
kinematic, fusing, and cutting elements of the kinematic automaton system 

=== PAGE 53 ===

47 
are achieved in the cellular automaton system.  In the kinematic system 
these elements are used to construct automata from primitive elements, 
modify automata (as when the contents of a tape are changed), and destroy 
(dis-assemble) automata. These functions are simulated in the cellular 
system by changing the states of the cells in a given area. This is 
accomplished by sending out a constructing arm, sweeping the area with it, 
and "writing" the desired state in each cell.  Both the constructive process 
(changing U into a passive confluent or passive transmission state) and the 
destructive process (changing a confluent or transmission state back to U) 
play essential roles in this process. 
12.  HEURISTICS OF CELLULAR SPACES 
So far we have considered only one particular cellular automaton 
system, which von Neumann defined for the purpose of investigating some 
organizational and programming aspects of self-reproduction (Sees. 3-10). 
But the concept of a cellular automaton is very broad, allowing many basic 
variations from von Neumann's system. We can change the geometry of the 
space and the neighborhood relation; we can consider indeterministic and 
probabilisitc transition functions as well as deterministic ones; and we can 
even consider non-homogeneous neighborhood relations and transition functions. 
The concept of a cellular automaton system is thus a very rich one. 
Its essential features are a quantized time and space, a finite number of 
possible states for each point of space-time, and a computable local trans- 
ition function or law (not necessarily deterministic or uniform over space) 
governing the operation of the systen through time. Many natural systems 
can be fruitfully approximated and simulated in a cellular framework.  The 
chief theoretical restrictions are two in number.  First, the natural system 
to be studied m«. 5t be governed by a local law so that it can be represented 

=== PAGE 54 ===

48 
by a finite transition function.    This precludes the use of cellular 
automata for the simulation of Newtonian gravitational systems,  for example, 
because the law of gravitation includes action-at-a-distance where there is 
no upper limit on the effective distance over which gravity acts.    Second, 
the behavior of the system to be simulated cannot depend on essential dis- 
continuities, that is, discontinuities which cannot be approximated in a 
discrete framework.    However, there may be no such natural systems. 
The most binding restriction on the use of cellular automata for the 
study of natural processes  is a practical one.     In any interesting case 
some or all of the following numerical parameters are large:    the number of 
possible states of a neighborhood,  the number of different transition func- 
tions to be investigated,  and the number and size of the cellular automata 
(i.e., histories) to be considered.    The practical import of these numbers 
depends on the extent to which sets of cases can be handled as a group,  and 
where simulation is involved,  on one's abilities and techniques for sel- 
ecting or generating the significant cases. 
Cellular automata systems have been successfully used for the study 
of natural systems.     It has   long been the practice to solve partial dif- 
ferential  equations for a vibrating membrane, or heat flow, or diffusion 
processes, by handling them in a discrete grid,  and since the laws in these 
cases are local  in character this amounts to using a cellular space,  the 
transition function being expresssd by the difference equation version 
of the differential equations.    Non-homogeneous cellular automata have been 
used in the simulation of neural nets and of information processing by heart 
tissue,  and I think cellular automata systems will be very useful for 
simulating evolutionary systems. 

=== PAGE 55 ===

49 
[Rochester,  et.  al., "Tests on a Cell Assembly TTieory of the Action 
of the Brain."] 
[Swain and Flanigan,  "Computer Simulation of A-V Nodal Conduction."] 
[Rosenberg,  Simulation of Genetic Populations with Bioahemioat Properties, 
Sec.  3.3.] 
Many questions about cellular automata systems can be answered by 
analytical methods.    Von Neumann's results  about the computation universality 
and construction univer ality of his  29-state cellular system were established 
in this way,  as were the results of Moore and Myhill concerning the existence 
of configurations which can exist only initially (Moore, Machine Models of 
Self-Reproduction"; Myhill,  "The Converse of Moore's Garden-of-Eden Theorem")   . 
But many interesting questions about cellular systems cannot be answered 
analytically.    This  is especially so for cellular systems which are adequate 
for modeling natural systems.    Here the sheer complexity of the situation 
a-id/or the  indefinite nature of the problem demands simulation. 
Simulation can be carried out   in different ways and for different 
purposes.    One type of problem is this.    Given a cellular automaton system, 
and hence a transition function,  to find particular cases   (i.e., cellular 
automata) which have certain properties.    Examples are found in the work 
of Ulam and his collaborators    (eg.   Ulam,   "Some Mathematical  Problems Con- 
cerned with Patterns of Growth of Figures" ).     It is generally necessary to 
run many cases before finding an interesting one,  and sometimes  even before 
acquiring sufficient experience to select  initial states wisely.    Such 
computer investigations are best carried oiK with the investigator in 
intimate contact with the machine,   so that he can observe the effects of 
his decisions,  and can terminate unpromising runs before they waste valuable 
machine time. 

=== PAGE 56 ===

50 
An even more difficult problem is that of searching for a transition 
function which defines a cellular automaton system having certain properties. 
One may seek a cellular system which simulates some given natural system; 
for example, an evolutionary system, the fibrillation of the heart,  individual 
behavior, or group behavior.    Von Neumann sought  a cellular automaton system 
with "not too many states" which was computationally and constructionally 
universal.    The problem of finding a transition function which generates 
automata with certain properties is a very important and basic problem,  so 
we will discuss its general nature and then consider a promising method 
for solving it by means of a man-machine complex. 
With respect to the number of automata under consideration, the 
problem of finding a transition function which satisfies certain conditions 
is one level higher than the problem of finding a cellular automaton of a given 
system which satisfies a certain condition.    The  latter problem concerns 
the class of cellular automata defined by a single cellular automaton system, 
while the former problem concerns a class of cellular automata systems. 
Suppose we choose a cellular space, that is a geometry and neighborhood 
relation.    Each transition function defines a cellular automaton system 
based on this space,  and consisting of a set of cellular automata.    Hence 
when one considers all possible transition functions definable on a given 
cellular space, he is considering not merely a set of cellular automata, 
but a set of sets of cellular automata. 
The problem of finding a transition function which generates certain 
behaviors is analogous to the  inductive problem of finding a law which 
accounts for observed phenomena, just as a cellular automaton system is 
analogous to  (and therefore can be used to simulate) a natural system. 
A look at this analogy will help us understand how cellular automata can 
be used to simulate natural systems.    Consider first some natural system 
■a^M 

=== PAGE 57 ===

51 
in sapce-time,  e.g.,  the solar system.    The laws of a natural system define 
a set of possible universes, namely, all those universes which result from 
applying these laws to some state of the system at some arbitrary time. 
[These universes are causally possible universes,  as distinguished, 
for example,  from logically possible universes.    The logic of statements 
about causally possible and causally necessary universes  is treated in 
my "The  Logic  of Causal Propositions."] 
Consider second a cellular automaton system.     Its underlying cellular space 
corresponds to the space-time basis of a natural system.     Its transition 
function corresponds to the law   (or set of laws) of a natural system.    Similarly, 
its transition function defines  a set of possible universes, namely, all 
the cellular automata which result from applying the transition function 
to an initial state of the system. 
[If the transition function  is deterministic,  each  initial state defines 
a single cellular automaton.     If the transition function is indeterministic, 
each initial state defines a set   (possibly infinite) of cellular automata. 
If the transition function is probabilistic,  there is a succession of 
poobability distributions over the succession of finite histories of 
cellular automata resulting from an initial state.] 
A cellular automaton is thus a possible world,  and a cellular automaton 
system is a set of possible worlds. 
We can now see more clearly the analogy between the automata theorists' 
problem of starting with a given type of cellular automaton behavior  (e.g., 
self-reproduction,  evolution)  and ending with a cellular automaton system 
in which this behavior occurs,   and the natural scientists'  problem of 
beginning with certain observed phenomenon and ending with a  law which 
accounts for that phenomenon.     Both begin with some phenomenon or behavior 
and end with a law or transition function such that a system governed by 

=== PAGE 58 ===

52 
that law or transition function displays that phenomenon or behavior. The 
scientist may proceed by considering different possible laws, inferring 
consequences from each, and checking the consequences against the given 
observed phenomenon. Analogously, the automaton theorist may proceed by 
considering different transition functions and ascertaining what automaton 
behaviors each generates. This may be done analytically (as von Neumann 
did in his design of a self-reproducing automaton) or computationally (by 
simulating cellular automata which have these transition functions). The 
analogy between the natural scientists' procedure for discovering and 
confirming laws to explain observed phenomena and the automata theorists' 
procedure for discovering transition functions and showing that they produce 
certain behavior becomes an identity when cellular automata are used to 
model or simulate natural systems. 
[In my forthcoming book, Cause,   Chanae, and Reason,  I will give an 
analysis of inductive inference in terms of a probabilistic choice, from 
among alternative possible laws, of a law to account for observed phenomena.] 
This concludes our general remarks about the problem of finding a 
transition function satisfying certain behavioral conditions. We will 
explain next an interactive man-machine method for solving certain problems 
of this sort which has already been used successfully and which is a 
promising tool for this type of basic investigation. The general principle 
is this. The investigator partly defines a transition function for his 
cellular space. He then specifies an initial automaton state and has the 
computer generate a finite fragment of the resultant cellular automaton 
in an attempt to produce one of the desired phenomena. He repeats this 
step until it succeeds or until he decides it is not promising.  In the 
latter case he tries an alternate partial definition. If the step succeeds, 
he augments the partial definition further in an attempt to produce other 

=== PAGE 59 ===

53 
desired phenomena, and repeats the step. 
The best way to explain this heuristic method in detail is to describe 
a case in which it was successful. 
The problem was that of improving on von Neumann's cellular automaton 
results with respect to the number of states needed for computation and 
construction universality, so let us first formulate von Neumann's problem 
in a general way. After considering various kinds of cellular frameworks, 
von Neumann decided on a cellular space consisting of a two-dimensional 
infinite array of square cells (a "checkerboard") and a "neighborhood" 
composed of a cell and the four cells with which it shares boundaries. 
[Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata,  Part II, Ch. 1 and Sec. 2.1] 
His problem was then to define a transition function (and thus a cellular 
automaton system) satisfying the following four conditions. 
(1) The system is homogeneous in the sense that the neighborhood 
relation and the transition function are the same for every cell. This 
restriction prevents one from building a specific automaton design into 
the cellular space by varying the transition function from cell to cell. 
(2) A universal computing (Turing) machine can be embedded in the 
cellular system. This machine will occupy a finite number of cells 
initially, but will have the capability of extending itself indefinitely 
so as to have unlimited storage capacity, 
(3) The system is construction-universal in the following sense. 
Any finite number of designated cells in arbitrarily assigned states 
constitutes an (initially) finite machine. The construction-universality 
requirement is that thare exist a class M of finite automata which 
contains a universal Turing machine M     and also a machine M     with this 6 u c 
ability:  for any machine M belonging to M, when M     is supplied with a 

=== PAGE 60 ===

in.HUI, m mmmmmmmmm1 
54 
description of M and placed in an environment of blank states, M     will 
construct M somewhere in this environment. The machine W is a universal c 
constructing machine. In Section 10 we took M to be the class of initially 
quiescent automata. 
(4) The number of states in each cell is "relatively small". 
The problem just stated is clearly not a formal one, but depends on 
the interpretation of such concepts as "embedding" and "relatively small". 
This is so even though a solution to the problem can be stated formally, 
as we stated von Neumann's own solution to the problem (Sees. 9, 10). 
The reason r3r the fourth requirement, that the number of states be relatively 
small, is that without this requirement the problem is easily solved. 
For we could place a general-purpose computer (or the finite part of a 
universal Turing machine) in each cell, and arrange that each such computer 
could communicate with its four neighbors.  It is easy to see that any 
infinite row (or equivalent) of cells constitutes a universal computing 
machine, with one cell serving as the finite automaton part and the cells 
to its left and right serving as an infinite tape. Moreover, universal 
construction and self-reproduction would not be hard to achieve in such a 
cellular automaton system. 
Von Neumann approached and solved this problem analytically. The 
primitive elements he deviled were based on those he used in the logical 
design of the EDVAC, the first stored program electronic computer. 
[See Theory of Self-Reproduaing Automata^  pp. 9, 44, 99, 157. Essentially 
the same primitives were used in his kinematic automata; See Sec. 1 above.] 
We will briefly describe these primitives, and then show how von Neumann 
very cleverly adapted them to his cellular space so as to achieve a 
construction-universal and computation-universal cellular automaton system 
with a relatively small number (29) of states. 

=== PAGE 61 ===

55 
The fundamental units of the design of the EDVAC were switch- 
delay elements with one to three excitatory inputs, possibly one or two 
inhibitory inputs, and a threshold number 1, 2, or 3. An element emits 
a stimulus (pulse) at time t + 1 if and only if two conditions are satisfied 
at time t:    no inhibitory input is stimulated, and the number of excitatory 
inputs stimulated is at least as great as the threshold number. No stimulus 
is emitted at time zero, but there is in addition a "clock" element which 
emits a pulse at every moment of time. 
To adapt this set of primitives to the two-dimensional cellular 
framework, it was necessary to provide for wire-branching and wire-crossing, 
either directly or indirectly. In his cellular systen von Neumann acc- 
omplished wire-branching directly, by making this one of the time functions 
of the confluent element (C). In contrast, he accomplished wire-crossing 
indirectly, by synthesizing a coded channel from the primitives he did adopt 
(Fig. 7). Note that all of the EDVAC primitives are initially quiescent, 
except for the clock. To synthesize a clock in the cellular system one 
establishes a cellular path (like the repeater in Fig. 12a), and stipulates 
that the elements of the path be active initially. 
The adaptation of the EDVAC logical design primitives to a cellular 
framework, described so far, is fairly straightforward. But to make a 
cell capable of becoming each of these primitives would require a very 
large number of states, since each primitive itself has many possible 
input and output directions. This large number of states would then require 
a large number of intermediate states for construction (von Neumann's 
sensitized states S-, So, §.  ...).  Further states would be required for 
destruction. What is really ingenious is the way von Neumann was able 
to realize all the EDVAC functions with a transition function having only 

=== PAGE 62 ===

mmm I ' 
56 
29 states. His main method for accomplishing this reduction was to exploit 
the context of a cell. The data needed to specify the input and output 
directions of an element are minimized by specifying only the output direction 
within the cell (and this only for transmission states). The input directions 
for an element in a cell are determined by the states of the neighboring 
cells. In the end only twelve states are required for conjunction, disjunction, 
and wire-branching. In addition, von Neumann made good use of the duality 
of ordinary and special transmission states to realize a destructive cap- 
ability, as well as negation, with only eight additional states. 
The transition function for a cell is a finite table, giving for each 
state of the cell snd its neighbors the state of the next cell. If the 
different local behaviors to be realized have some degree of logical 
independence, the function may be defined piecemeal, by partially defining 
it (i.e., defining it for certain cases) to get one behavior, further defining 
it to get another behavior, etc., etc.  In this way a sequence of stronger 
partial transition functions is defined, allowing more and more types of 
behavior. Now suppose at a certain stage a number of desired behaviors 
are possible but a further desired behavior is excluded. One then goes back 
in the sequence and attempts to modify the partial definitions so as to 
preserve the achieved desired behaviors and also obtain the further desired 
behavior. 
Note that a partially defined transition function is actually an 
indeterministic transition function,  allowing many possible succeeding 
states for the unspecified cases.    Hence the procedure just described is 
one of defining stronger and stronger indeterministic transition functions, 
until one finally obtains a transition function, either deterministic or 
indeterministic, which achieves   the desired behavior. 

=== PAGE 63 ===

57 
This is the procedure von Neumann actually followed in defining his 
transition function (see Fig.  15). 
[Theory of Self-Reproduaing Automata,  Part II, Ch. 2.] 
He first defined the ordinary transmission states, out of which one can 
build disjunctive switches and signal transmission paths which can go 
straight or turn corners.    He next defined the confluent states;  from these 
and the ordinary transmission states one can construct conjunctive switches 
and wire-branching devices.    At this stage in his synthesis the confluent 
states had a single unit of delay.    He then added the special transmission 
states to achieve the destructive process:  active special transmission 
states kill both ordinary transmission and confluent states back to U, and 
active ordinary transmission states kill special transmission states back 
to Q,    He decided to realize the constructive process by means of a sequence 
of stimuli sent into a cell in state U from a transmission state; this 
required "sensitized" states to store the initial segments of the sequence 
(see Fig. 9).    Now the natural way to generate a sequence of stimuli is 
to take a single stimulus, send it along alternative paths with different 
delays,  and then merge these paths  (as in the pulser of Fig.  5).    But this 
could not be done with the transition function as it was defined.     For 
consider the delays along two different paths from one cell to another, 
where the paths are composed of transmission and confluent states.     The 
difference in cell  length of these paths must be a multiple of two,  and 
since both transmission and confluent states had  (at this point of the def- 
inition) a unit delay,  the time delays along these two paths must differ 
by a multiple of two.    Hence one could not produce, by this natural 
technique and in the system as defined, an arbitrary finite pulse sequence 
ij ig  ... t„    (each i    = 0, 1.) To remedy this defect,  von Neumann went 
back and modified his transition function by giving confluent states  a 

=== PAGE 64 ===

MPNWHM^M^^^ 
58 
double delay. 
[Theory of Self-Eevvoduaing Automata,  pp.  146-148 and Fig. 8] 
In this way von Neumann defined a transition function with a relatively 
small  set of states  (29)  which was nevertheless sufficient to achieve a 
rather powerful set of elementary operations or behaviors:    the logical 
operations of "or" and of "and",  transmission, wire-branching,  arbitrary 
relative delays down alternate paths,  construction,  and destruction.    Using 
these operations, he proceeded to synthesize various organs  (pulser, 
decoder,  coded channel, periodic pulser,  constructing arm head) and higher- 
level  functions  (sensing,  negation).    With these he synthesized still higher 
level organs  (control unit,  constructing arm, tape, constructing unit), and 
finally a universal computer and a universal constructor. 
In the last few pages we have formulated von Neumann's problem as 
he might have viewed it at the start, and indicated his  general method 
of solving it.    Using this method,  von Neumann found a solution with 29 
states per cell.    The problem arises:    can this number be reduced 
appreciably? 
This problem was taken by Edpar Codd as his doctoral problem,  and he 
solved it very successfully. 
[Edgar F. Codd, Propagation,  Computation, and Construation in Two- 
Dimensional Cellular Spaces.    Ph.D.  Thesis  in Communication Sciences, 
University of Michigan,  1965.    This has been published as a book by 
Academic Press  (1968) under the title Cellular Automata.] 
He was able to devise an eight-state cellular system which is both 
computational-universal and construction-universal.    Moreover, this system 
is stronger than von Neumann's  in two additional respects.    The transition- 
function has a stronger kind of rotat ion-symmetry than does von Neumann's. 
Also,  there are two states such that any finite configuration  (area)  of 
 L. 

=== PAGE 65 ===

59 
these two states can be read and erased as well as written (constructed). 
This is possible because that state of a cell which is in one of these two 
states can be sensed by means of an "echo signal", which reflects (bounds 
back) from the cell, the nature of the reflected signal depending on the 
state of the cell. In contrast, to sense whether a cell in von Neumann's 
system is in state U or state +, we send a signal through  the cell (see 
Fig. 24). While it would be very hard to prove, it seems doubtful that 
there are two states of von Neumann's system such that any finite area of 
these two states could be read or sensed from within the system. 
Codd's cellular automaton system is primarily of interest to us here 
because it was generated by what we have called "the interactive man-machine 
method." 
[He also used this method to search, unsuccessfully, for universal 
systems with eight neighbors per cell but only two or three states.] 
As von Neumann did, Codd chose as sub-goals certain elementary behavioral 
functions, which he thought he could later synthesize into organs, larger 
units, and finally universal computers and constructors. He then proceeded 
to define his transmission function piecemeal so as to obtain these 
behaviors, retreating when a partial definition turned out to have undes- 
irable consequences, and either modifying the definition as it had been 
specified at an earlier stage or seeking alternative behavior (sub-goals) 
to realize the final goal. But whereas von Neumann proceeded analytically, 
using only his own reasoning and testing a few cases by hand, Codd used 
a computing machine to assist him. 
The procedure was as follows. The user first gives the computer the 
neighborhood relation, the number of states per cell, and the symmetry 
condition to be imposed on the final transition function. The user then 
gives the computer a partial transition function by means of which he hopes 

=== PAGE 66 ===

60 
to generate a certain kind of behavior; the computer extends the partial 
transition function in accordance with the symmetry condition, or lets the 
user know that this extension is impossible so he can modify his definition. 
Next, the user gives the computer an initial state he hopes will lead to a 
certain phenomenon. The computer calculates the behavior of the resultant 
cellular automaton time-step by time-step, printing out the result at each 
time-step, stopping at each time-step to allow the user to make a choice, 
and stopping when it comes on a condition not covered by the partial 
transition function. When the latter happens, the user may further specify 
the transition function. At any time-step the user can go back to earlier 
time-steps and change a partial definition, or go back to the beginning 
and start with a different initial state and/or partial definition. The 
user makes these choices on the basis of the simulated behavior he observes. 
There are obvious advantages to such simulations. The computer can 
make routine calculations rapidly as well as accurately, it can check 
constraints automatically, and it can assume responsibility for storing and 
arranging large amounts of data in a way that makes vital information 
immediately available to the user when he needs it. These advantages lead 
in turn to deeper advantages. For example, a human generally finds it 
difficult to trace out the successive states of an automaton when the 
transition function is basically different from those functions he is 
familiar with. A machine has no such difficulties, since it calculates 
by brute force and not in terms of certain intuitions derived from ex- 
perience. Hence by using a machine one can quickly explore the consequences 
of an unfamiliar rule. 
In the process of defining his 29-state transition function, von Neumann 
started with the usual computer primitives (switches and delays), and adapted 

=== PAGE 67 ===

61 
them to the cellular context so he could realize not only the functions 
essential to computing per se, but also the functions needed to carry out 
computation  (and construction as well) in a cellular space.    The most basic 
of these latter functions are:     sensing the state of a cell,  as in reading 
a tape   (Fig.   24);  changing the state of a cell -- this  includes construction 
and destruction processes,  as well as logical and transmission processes; 
and operating a signal transmission path from a source  -- this includes 
extending,  retracting,  and carrying out operations at  the terminus of the 
path  (see the constructing arm.  Figs,  18-23).    With a machine to test each 
possible transition function by simulation,  Codd could and did aim directly 
at achieving the basic functions needed for computation and construction 
in a cellular space.    Thus whereas von Neumann took disjunction and 
conjunction as primitives and synthesized negation,  Codd was able to 
synthesize all switching functions from operations which, in a cellular 
framework,  are more fundamental.  After conducting his  investiagtion with the 
assistance of a computer, he achieved an eight-state universal cellular 
system which has a number of novel and interesting features,  and his success 
was due in part to the assistance he recieved from the computer.    The most 
striking case of this assistance was the discovery of the echo phenomenon. 
The technique of reading (sensing) the state of a cell by reflecting an 
echo signal  from that cell was not designed or planned.     Rather, the phenomenon 
of an echo signal was accidentally generated in the course of a simulation 
which had a different objective,  and then recognized by the experimenter 
on the basis of a possible sensing technique. 
A brief summary of the eight states and their chief functions will 
bring out some of the novel features of Codd's cellular automaton system. 
[The system he defined is  indeterministic,  since he only specified 
the transition function up to the point where universal  computation and 

=== PAGE 68 ===

62 
universal construction are possible.] 
Four of the states (0, 1, 2, 3) mainly perform structural functions, while 
four (4, 5, 6, 7) are used for signalling. State zero (0) is the blank 
state. State one (1) is used to mark out a bi-directional transmission 
path through the cellular space. Such a path is ready to conduct signals 
when it is insulated or "sheathed" by neighbors which are in the sheathing 
state (2J. State three (3) is used to perform gating functions. Two of the 
signal states (4, 5) are used for information transmission and processing. 
The direction of a signal down a transmission line is determined by means of 
a blank state (0); for example, "04" moves to the right, "40" moves to the 
left. The signal state six (6) is used to cause a sheath to be formed 
on th« two sides of a transmission line of ones; compare the myelin sheath 
surrounding a neuron. The signal state seven (7) is used to activate an 
automaton by setting up certain gates and starting the automaton. Thus the 
construction of an automaton takes place in three stages. First, the basic 
structure is laid down in an area by changing certain cells from state 
zero to state one. Second, the transmission paths are sheathed by the 
sheathing signal. Finally, the constructed automaton is activated by the 
activating signal. 
We said earlier that cellular automaton systems are not only of 
interest in their own right, but provide a framework for investigating 
many natural systems, including the heart, nerve nets, and evolutionary 
systems. It therefore seemed worthwhile to develop an interactive man- 
machine system especially suited to this purpose, and some of us are now 
doing this. 
[This is a project of the Logic of Computers Group, Department of 
Computer and Communication Sciences, University of Michigan. It is under 

=== PAGE 69 ===

63 
the direction of John Holland,  Ronald Brender,  and myself.    The work is 
supported by the National Institutes of Health and the Advanced Research 
Projects Agency of the Department of Defense.] 
We have two small computing machines,  one connected to a disc file, another 
to an oscilloscope unit with a light pen, and both interconnected via an 
interface.    The first machine stores the information concerning the cellular auto- 
maton under investigation:    the cellular geometry, the neighborhood relation, 
the transition function as so far defined, the initial state under con- 
struction,  and the history of the automaton as so far computed.    This history 
will be stored on the disc file.    The second machine displays either the 
transition function or a selected portion of the history,  as requested by 
the investigator.    This machine also receives the investigator's input 
to the process via light pen or typewriter.    The investigator may insert 
a new initial state or modify the transition function.    He may ask to see 
a different part of the history or to see the present state in more detail, 
or he may request the machine to return to an earlier point in history 
and compute the subsequent history with a modified transition function. 
An essential part of this interactive man-machine combine is a 
a software system that permits the investigator to easily control and direct 
the computation,  so he can devote most of his intellectual energies to 
guiding the investigation:    making decisions,  looking for interesting 
phenomena,  and thinking up suggestions and hypotheses.    This software 
system will consist of data structures, programs, and languages especially 
designed for convenient man-machine communication during the investigative 
process.     When completed, the software system will allow easy and sepatate 
specification of the cell geometry,  the neighborhood relation, the trans- 
ition function,  and initial states,  and will provide ample options for 
control. 

=== PAGE 70 ===

T~l 
64 
Our aim is to optimize the division of labor between man and machine 
for this particular type of research, by arranging for each to do those 
tasks he is best suited for.    If we have a reasonable measure of success, 
the resultant interactive man-machine complex should be a very powerful 
instrument for the investigation of cellular automata systems. 
I 

=== PAGE 71 ===

65 
[ i i 
f \ 
j "i  ! 
h^ / ^    «   ' "H   A   C^ 1   ^ ^       -           - -*— 
1 ^J 
r 
i    1 
1 
• 
■•^ *■■ 
i 
i   _r 1 .r 1 
* ^ L 1   * x . LZ^   A   1 
— I 
L L-r- i 
L .   | 
i   r % 
1   . 
1              r . 
"   1 
1 
m MM 
!   r 1 ' i i L 1          \     ' ^    . '  4 V    .   1 
{—1 i 
1 
1 
J 1 1             1 
k 1 
t r 
Fig. I        CELLULAR   SPACE 

=== PAGE 72 ===

66 
Unexcitable U 
r 
Ordinary 
Transmission { 
r 
Special 
Transmission 
^ 
=» 
YS 
'fN 
c 
c 
Confluent 
^ 
Sensitized       < 
'00 
^ 
'01 10 
^01 10 It 
II 
^0 
»000 
Fig.2  VON NEUMANN'S  29 STATES 

=== PAGE 73 ===

A B 
a 
^ 
1 -j 
0C3-O 
67 
Fig.3 (a) SWITCH AND DELAY CIRCUITS 

=== PAGE 74 ===

n 
68 
B 
C — 
— C 
Fig3(b) CORRESPONDING CONFLUENT  AND 
ORDINARY TRANSMISSION ELEMENTS 
SWITCH AND DELAY REALIZATION OF 
CONFLUENT AND ORDINARY TRANS - 
MISSION   ELEMENTS 

=== PAGE 75 ===

69 
a i 
T 1 1  
I     C      |   ^y    I^ 
I I 
II 
» i 
/TV 
I    K\ 
Fig.4 OPERATION OF SPECIAL 
TRANSMISSION STATES 

=== PAGE 76 ===

70 
A 
\ 
t 
INPUT   j     C 
I L 
Fig. 5 
OUTPUT 
f 
t t 
1 
PULSERP(IOIOI) 
t 
t 

=== PAGE 77 ===

71 
ABC D 
\ 1  
I I 
C      I 
)  
i \ 
i i 
i i 
k 
f 
i 
INPUT    j      C     | 
I I 
11 
a 
J L 
I 
C     !OUTPUT 
f 
a 
Fig,6 DECODER D(IOIOI) 

=== PAGE 78 ===

72 
J2 
Fig.7 A   CODED CHANNEL 

=== PAGE 79 ===

B     C    D     E   F    6     H 
73 
c,o \ - 
1 
• ^o \ 
.f co, t t •t co, 
- - c 
"t" 
- - c 
t 
- i 
c C,0 f i 
c \ t • t s. t 
-~ - c 
t 
- - c 
t 
* t 
CI0 1 So i 
•f c 01 t c - f •t c 
I 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
(a) CROSSING ORGAN 
h 
c 10 1 
•t C0I 
d 
e 
9    f 
Output from / and j : IOIOIO 
Output from « and / : OIOIOI 
(b) INITIAL STATE OF CLOCK 
Fig.8 CROSSING ORGAN 

=== PAGE 80 ===

n 
74 
t 
A-/ 
\ 
\ 
/ 
/ 
i 4 
i 
V \ 
\ 
\ 
/ 
/- 
^    \   ^    V   ^ 
/ 
\" 
/ 
\ 
\ 
o\ \ 
\ 
\ 
°\7 
\ 
\ 
0\ 
\ 
\ 
/ 
o\-i 
v   / (/) 
/ 
./ 
V 
"I I 
LÜ 
_I 
CD 
?D 
x b 
/ 
-/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
y 
/ 
/ 
CO 
en ÜJ 
ü o or Q. 
o 
I- 
o 3 
(T 
H 
</) 
Z 
o o 
CD 
d» 

=== PAGE 81 ===

75 
r 
i  
ion 
B    c —i—i 
i     1/ 
__L-J 
vnn I 
1010 
(a) BEGINNING 
I 
ABC 
f— r-T"! i 
i  
r 
I       1/ 
I I 
LC'    7 
ft 
I 
L__J_!LI»J 
(b) END 
Fig.10 EXAMPLE OF THE 
CONSTRUCTION PROCESS 

=== PAGE 82 ===

76 
BCD 1     1 
,—'  c 1     1 
i— 
r 
1 
1 
1  \y 
1 
1 c <^ 
\     i 
/ 
2 
3 
Fig.II EXAMPLE OF THE 
DESTRUCTION PROCESS 

=== PAGE 83 ===

r 
77 
SINGLE 
SEQUENCE 
10101  IN 
SEQUENCE lllll FROM AN 
ORDINARY  TRANSMISSION STATE 
FIRST KILLS C TO ^ AND THEN 
CONSTRUCTS S9 ,5, .5,, .5,,, i*C) j 
 v  
I 1 Ir I | |J REPEATED 
"> I 
/K 
^ 
SEQUENCE 
IOIOI OUT 
(a)REPEATER FOR PERIODIC PULSER 
Fig.12 PERIODIC PULSERPP(IOIOI) 

=== PAGE 84 ===

78 
lO 
o 
— 
I 
" 1* i 
O '' 
, , -«— 
1 
A     i 
1     u 
I 
PULSER P(IOIOI) 
i 
A 
i 
A 
^_ 1 
u 
, i i I 
— 
tl" o ^_ „ 
t ( i 
1 
"     1     o 
1 
-^— —   1 
1 
o 
i 
3 
START 
PULSE 
INPUT 
t ' " 1 
1 i 
A 
T     1 
I 
o 
o 
o 
cc lil in -j 
s s UJ 
a. 
wa.S 

=== PAGE 85 ===

79 
i- 
.2 
äs 
- 
IM 1  
1 —^ ü 
t 
t 
..... 
=> o ' ' 
- t ^— 
\ t v\\\ A \ 
o 
11 
11 
i 
0 T t o 
t t t 
J 
t . o 
1 
11 
..... 
t 
"   1 
1 
1 
o 
t t t i 
" 1 1 
1 
o 
UJ 
< O 
o 
a. Q 
a. o _i 
u. 
ro 
a. 
a. 

=== PAGE 86 ===

T! 
Og^^lo^OKOO^O CM 
80 
o g 
o 
cr LU   1 
N 
O 
O 
O 
LU 
cr 

=== PAGE 87 ===

"1 
81 
3 IS) 
<1H 
o 
> ■ H 
C 
T3 
C 
<u 
=>* 
<ü N 
■H 
4-» 
•H 
m w 
C u 4) ♦J 
« n *-> I« w 
o c IU o u • H 
c Ul 
<0 tn 
3 ■H 
o- E <u V> 
trt c 3 o i- 
4-> +J 
e •H -o 
=( c 3 
i/l ♦J 
IU c M a> 
C 3 n) f-* 
r <4-l 
u c 0 
t/i o 
u o o l-l    VI 
a e u 
c .0 
3 -i 
c a o u 
3   <U 
^ E 
o a 
M 
u S o rt 
X  £ 
c 
_2  
T3 4-1 
n 
O h 
<-> a) 
S 
■a o 
»J 
U T) IU IU 
u u ■H U 
•n lu u 
Irt 
S  i/i 
3 ex 
3 o 
73 IU 
«-I 
u IU 
•r-t 
•a 
0) 
h'S ^ >-( B v 
c c m 
13   h 
o 
C   Q   3 «      a o *J 
E «   3 
O O 
^   £13   +J 
X (U 
a > <u 
U   3   0) 
IU a 
IU 
>     • ■H C 
•M O 
U 
n *J 
x ir c u «  01 
(4 
X 
XI  in 
IU 
a. *-> <u « ♦J c 
(/)   -rH 
E u O i -a 
C 
Q> -H 
C -c 
O  -I 
■ t-l 
c ^ 
o 1/1 
U   -H 
«-> •-<     3t*J 
S  a 
o   l/l 
> *-> 
o *-> 13 
I* 
CQ 13 n 
H -H 8   IU   3 
0) E Ui    -<   O 
U 01 -H 
IU c     ■-< 
c 
TJ O 
m 3 -a o x c 
i-H 
73 0) 4J 
0) T) -H 
4-> 
O IU -o 
0> -H tl 
fcl 00  Rl 
•-i C 3 
•O -H O 
I« 4-1 
1/1 
<U JC 73 
W 4-1 0) 
rt -M 4-1 
4-1 3 U 
</> IU 
C ki 
C O -H 
O -H T3 
in U   4-1 
moo ■-< t.  C 
E •« 1/1 T3   0) 
C 4J 
{Q 4-1    Clj 
(- 3   4J 
4-i a. i/i 
X 3 Ei o n c c ■rH •-* 
»H t/1 
O 4-1 
73 <U 
4-1 
u IU 
01 
• 4-1 
I/)    rt 
tn 4-) 
o> tn 
o 
o c ^i  o 
CL-H 
t/1 
c m 
in  4-1 
in   o C 
a> 3 n u u u O    4-1 4-1 
i-i  tn 
Q. <U — 
73 n 
c -i 
o x u 
■H XJ <u 
♦J 0. 
u  oi tn 
tn  tn 
c 
«  o > 
o u 
ll 
O   - 
E 
tn  tn 
4-»   0 
in  X m 
X 0)   i- ü 
i-l   4-1    B! 4-1 
C n 
. .    U 
o a i o. 
in x or tn c o IU 0) 
X 
C Xi in 
« u VH   0.4-1 
4-1    01 A 
4-1 C 
n tn ' 
E 
0) o 
E 73 
lu a > 4-1 'H   4-1 
•H tn 73 tn 
4-1 U 
U 4-1 O   4-1 
c c c 3 0> X D 
•r-,   3 P    3 
m ^ o »-4 
.rf lH > tn 
o c o o u 
—.       o      r- 
u»  U!  LU 
c IU 
i    3 
C   -4 
O >4H 
JJ  
E O r-< 
►H  m 
O t« y-' 
0> 
01 
M    U 
■H    4) 
4->     CL 4^    bfl 
■rt tn c 
in OJ -H 
C   X C -H 
o c o « in   rt      -H 
C ^ 
N   r-4  .H 
,-H  =)t 4-1 
O 
O   O  4-i -d 
4-14-1 ^ 
73 rt 
^ ^ 01 3 
XI    U -7   O 
73 
|H 
rt 
o  rt 4->   r-l 
<U 
73 73 
01 
4-1    V 
O -I 
0>   bO 
<U 
X 
in .c 0>    4-1 
rt  3  ^ 4J O 
c o C -H 
O 4-1 
•H    O 
in iu 
in  i- 
H c tn 0) 
T3 in 3 
k.    0) -H 
(«   O «4-1 
3  O c "   u o a. u 
o o 
u 01 
IH   3 
E   73  -H    tl   +J 
C   4-1 
rt  3 l-i   B. 
4-1    4-> 
3 
rt O 
rt "7    C 
<J   -H 
IU 
Cu tn 
tn 4-i 
■H 
E E O   0) l-l 
14-1    •- 
m X 0) 
rt    4-1 
tu   rt 
> 4-1 
•-4 tf) 
4-1 
U «J 
§c 0> 
■f-. 3 
in -4 
•H   t4-i 
73    C 
■- <w B 
in tn 
in  tn 
-4     0) 
E « in rt 
c «J 
rt in 
IH u 
4J 13  rt 
4)   C 
rt    N   .H 
rt —i -a 
■rt « fci 
U  -H    O 
0>  tn 
P. C  X 
in  0»  c 
tn   rt 
X 
f4     ll   rt 
V  o — > .H 
1U ^\M 
u o o o 
t-. 
T3 
01 
+^ u 0) 
u 
73 
4) 
4-1 
rt 
E tn 
c rt u 
> E ■ H O ■ 
41 U 
U 14H ' 
0) 
a: 
x ii rt (5 .-4 
73 
O 
> •-4 C 
4->    O 
u rt . a x «T c u rt  u U x X>  in 
4) 
O. 4-1 
0)   rt 
4-1     C 
tn .rt 
E (U   O 
E 73 
• rt 4J     tX 
C 
0) •rt 
C rt 
O rt 
• —4 
tn c .* 
tn •rt 
4)       ■- 
o ^1(4-1 
O •rt 
h o 
n. 4-> 73 
73 rt 
4) 3 
rt   o 
A        <=       II • => 
ll •     .     v 
UOTSSTU1SUEJJ, 
XjBuipao 
X 
i   XI 
in 
C 7J 
rt  n U  3 4-1    O 
0)   rt 
> o • rt   I4H 
01 
X     8 §m 
u • 4) 
in 4J 
in tn 
D rt 
U   11 
o 
U l/)l 
2o 4-1   4-1 
m C 4-1 
O -4 
o m IU   11 
x: et 4-1    C 
rt c £ ■rt    U 
tn 3( 
e 4J o 
rt 4-1 
4-1 
in 73 
4) 
X 4J 
li u rt iu 
■rt ^i 
73 .H 
IU 73 
U 4) 
1) 4-1 
4-1 rt 
C 4-1 
■ rt in 
V   C 
ii  o 
rt  -4 
in 
4) in 
tn ■rt 
tu E 
a t/i( 
T " 
o l/D/ 
o 
o » 
O /—N 
73 4) •— U 4-> 
rt rt <SH 
3 4-1 
O tn i 
(J *—N 
i) II 
73 •c V 
4) *J ^—' 4-" 
U l« o 
4) 0 ,— li 
• rt u WJ 
73 B A 
0 /—s 
m <S 
• rt c •rt o 
9) o 
4-1 tn r-t 
rt 1) U5( 
4-1 4-1 
in rt A 
B /—% c ■ rt A 
o B 11 
• rt U v—' 
tn O ■-" 
o 3 li 
4-1 
in 
t) 
73 
4> 
X 
tn, 
w* 
w( 
(/2f  rt ri 
'—t     ^^     4J 
w, 
^( 
Ul( 
U5(      («( 
4) 
(/)( 
pazi^isuas 
IBtoads 
J 

=== PAGE 88 ===

n 
82 
I 
PRESENT | INTERNAL 
STATE 
INPUT  1 
STATE  ! 
NEXT 
INTERNAL 
|    STATE 
OUTPUT STATE 
^1 
'l 
^0 4) 
*i 
|     ^0 
^0 
^0 
(Q) Transition and output table for a 
particular finite automaton 
Fig.16 
SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM OF FINITE CELLULAR AUTOMATON 
j 

=== PAGE 89 ===

rr 
INPUT STATES 
CODED AS SEQUENCES 
83 
/»/»(Mill) 
REPRESENTING 
STATE do 
(INITIALLY ON) 
OUTPUT 
START 
INPUT 
STOP 
INPUT 
J*}^- 
^(lllll) 
REPRESENTING 
STATE d, 
OUTPUT 
START 
INPU^ 
STOP 
INPUT 
J: 
*Uo> 
3_ 
*(*,) 
«e 
«0FROM INPUT STATE   *0 
«TO PRODUCE OUTPUT STATE   ^0 
^FROM INPUT STATE -^ 
«4T0 START INTERNAL STATE </, 
ff,TO STOP INTERNAL STATE   «^ 
«7TO PRODUCE OUTPUT STATE ^ 
*4 
*5 
«gFROM INPUT STATE *Q 
«8TO PRODUCE OUTPUT STATE ^ 
«^ROM INPUT STATE -* , 
«2TO START INTERNAL STATE ^0 
«9TO STOP INTERNAL  STATE «^ 
«6T0 PRODUCE OUTPUT STATE (TQ 
-V- 
CODED CHANNEL 
Fig 16 
INPUT(S) «y TO 
CODED CHANNEL 
CONNECTED  TO 
OUTPUT t, 
(/»01l.2./...8) 
*O0J —n " 
PlOy) 
OUTPUT STATES 
11 ' SEQUENCES 
Pl*Z) -J l 
(b) CORRESPONDING 
FINITE CELLULAR 
AUTOMATON 

=== PAGE 90 ===

84 
-«— — oa. — -1 •" 
il So        1 
Q-K z      1 
NCOMPLETED 
OF CONSTRUC 
AUTOMATO 
a 0.Q K CO 
f> <- 
i t 
* z 
-a t 1 
\ 
f> t t- <- <- «- <-!<- <- <- <- <- <• 
a: < 
1T <= <= t C <= ^I<= <= <= <= <= t 
~N 1> •r 
^ f t 
-0 t 
£ 1> T 
f> t o z 
t- 
o 
cn 
z o 
ft 4- 
ft t 
1> t 
1> t 
f t 
ft t 
1> T 
^-. 1T t 
o fl -r 
o i> f 
li Qi 
^o 
uj 
z g i in 
1- 1- O 
u < H 
32 Z 
a: o » 
i- i- § 
^5 3 Q 
o ^ H 
O 
CJ z 
E 
< 
| 
c o o 
a> 
0) 
a. O 

=== PAGE 91 ===

^^»■^^   II11^ I 
85 
D     E 
:> 
"t ] 
/ 
2 
(a) Head of Constructing Arm       (b) Head Fed from Left 
A B C Ö £ 
5 ^ ~-> => :> b 
0 - — - t 
/ 
2 
D     E 
 X 
•—r => 
1> t      i 
r t 
l '' \\ 
fr t 
/ 
2 
3 
4 
5 
S'    0' 
(c) Head Fed from Below 
Fig. 18   CONSTRUCTING  ARM 

=== PAGE 92 ===

L'IJ.l .    .. >     !   «JU JUii.i.U . 
(a)   Starting with 
86 
ABC 
^ :> u 
5'0 f u 
d?7 
A        B    C 
(b) NIJ^U—•- into S or 5^000065 I> :> ^ 
50 - <: 
/ 
2 
ABC 
(c)   Ü f ü=>into öor^'produces ^> => r> 
s'o -* 
A 
/ 
2 
Fig. 19  HORIZONTAL ADVANCE  OF CONSTRUCTING ARM 

=== PAGE 93 ===

87 
Starting with 
U f-•—fllUinto d? or ^'produces 
U^ U ^ into 5 or 5'produces 
A B 
U U 
5 => => 
s'o f 
0' 
A     B 
\ *- 
S /V 
f 
s,o t 
/ 
2 
3 
I 
2 
3 
0' 
A     B 
r ^> 
{\ i 
s'o t 
/ 
2 
3 
0' 
Fig. 20 VERTICAL ADVANCE OF CONSTRUCTING ARM 

=== PAGE 94 ===

88 
Starting with 
U  ^ Into 0 or 0' Produc es 
U<= uTlnto 5or 5'Produ ces 
U^Usl.US Into^ or ^'Produces 
U=^Ux Into 5 or 5/Produces 
5 ^> oj^ 
s'c »-It 
0' 
S 5 ^i^ s'o -'' ♦ 
O' 
S => =>; {> 
s'o t k ^/ 
s ^1 - |   1 
5' 0 4 S 
0' 
s => => 
—i 
_1 8  i ro f 
d?' 
Fig.2l HORIZONTAL RETREAT OF CONSTRUCTING ARM 
WITH CONSTRUCTION OF r AND 8 

=== PAGE 95 ===

rr 
89 
Starting with 
U*- U i U => into O or ^'produces 
U ffU^ U y into 5 or 5' produces 
ü tüS into O or ö'produces 
U   ^   into 5 or 5'produces 
=> =» 
s 1> t 
so t 
i - 
s =} t 
sh t 0' 
r <= 
s => ft 
^ t 
0' 
r S 
s => f 
^ f 
0' 
y s 
s ^ => 
s'o f 
0' 
Fig 22   VERTICAL RETREAT OF CONSTRUCTION OFy AND 8 

=== PAGE 96 ===

Starting with 
U   f  into 0 or ^'produces 
90 
^ -> 
so t 
0' 
=» t 1 
so f 
^' 
A pulse into O or ^'exits at e 
as the stimulus to start the 
constructed automaton 
=? t 
5. t 
^P7 
u into 5 or 5' produces ^ =? 
so t 
d7# 
Fig.23 INJECTION OF STARTING STIMULUS 
INTO THE CONSTRUCTED AUTOMATON 

=== PAGE 97 ===

91 
Tape 
A B c D f 
1/ C - — - - * 
u C => =» =^ => ^ 1 
^ ^ 4 ^./ n ^/ 
w - *■ - " 
/ 
2 
3 
4 
(a) Before Reading 
Xn   is in U for "zero" 
Xn   is in   \ for "one" 
Tape 
A B c D £ 
V C — - — - — * 
u C => => => =? ^ i 
^ ^ ^ *„., 1 ^./ 
w - - < -   — 
/ 
J 
(b) After Reading 
Fig. 24 TAPE, READING LOOP, AND CONSTRUCTING ARM 

=== PAGE 98 ===

92 
Starting with 
1/ C - - — -* i 
u C => ^ ^> ^> => ; 
Tape ^ ^ ^ ^Z * ''C»*/ 
W 1 - - - - — _ 
u^u^u into U produces 
y C -* - ^ - — i 
u C => =? => => => 41 
Tape A' 0 A' / 2 U ^ 
W — - — *- - ^ — 
Then U | U  i U — into l^ produces 
^ C ^ -* — - i ^/ C ^> => =» => => * 
Tape Xo A' / ^ AT * 
W — - - - — - — 
And   U ^ IT ^ U —- into U produces 
V C - -* - -* — £: 
u C ^ ^> =» ^> ^ => ft 
Tape ^ r/ ** *„., i ^ 
W - ^ - — + - - - 
Finally U ^ U ^    into V produces 
V 
U 
Tape 
W 
c - - ^ - — 
c ^> =»  V 
^> ^ =^ 
^0 A- / ^ X n-l A' 
^_ - - *- — ~- ^ 
Fig.25  WRITING "ONE"  IN CELL ^   AND LENGTHENING 
THE READING LOOP 

=== PAGE 99 ===

^ 
-» 
^ 
1 
93 
Q. 
8 
Q (J 
zz 
I- 
11' tF t fT- 
tTf 
±1 ll Ü Ü 
a o 
i § Ui 
< I 
o: tu 
er UJ 
(- 
a. 
Ü (VJ 
I' 
_J 
O 
o o 
UJ 
a. < 
z 
I K Q 
(- O 
z 

=== PAGE 100 ===

94 
^ — QQ. — — —1 ». 
1 
PART   1 
TED     | 
 l 
ö 
ii K 
* 
M 
MPLETED 
CONSTRUC 
lUTOMATOM 
A * 
T 
•^ 
88 
-fr o ^         1 zO        1 
5            1 
oa. m 
1 
a — 
LU 
0. 
< 
t ♦ <- 4- ♦ ♦t* * «■ ♦ *■ ♦ 
f ^ <= 4= <J= t t|^ t <i= t 4= ♦ .— -fr t 
^ ff t 2 O 
o - •> ^ * 
\0 fr t < *< <w 
ff1 t 
z 
1- o — ^ f 
* 
♦ er i.0 - f 
f V) 
z o u 
\0 - t 
i ^.-^ t 
O ^ t O 4 1» 
il o 
<o _l 
o 
1= 
§1 
li o o 
_i5 
er o 
1— o z 
? O 
er i- 
c/) 
z 
o 
Ü 
_l 
< c/) ir üJ 
> 
z 3 
OsJ 
UND ONliOnaiSNCO iINn 3dVi 

=== PAGE 101 ===

95 
M 
¥ 
■jmo 
CONSTRUCTING ARM 
UNIVERSAL 
CONSTRUCTOR 
¥ 
'JD(M)oJiM)D  A  
Zl 
Fig.28 MODIFIED UNIVERSAL  CONSTRUCTOR 

=== PAGE 102 ===

r T^ 
96 
< 
CD 
o 
H 
CO 
o o ^ 
g 
o 
O 
o or Q. 
UJ 
cr i 
_i 
UJ 
C/) 
< 
JIÜL 
O H 
< 
CM 
L 
xJ 

=== PAGE 103 ===

wmm 
97 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Arbib,  Michael A.,  "Simple Self-Reproducing Universal Automata."    Information 
and Control 9  (1966)  177-189. 
Bagley, J.  D., The Behavior of Adaptive Systems which Employ Genetic and 
Correlation Algorithms,  Ph.D. Thesis, University of Michigan,  1967. 
Balzer,  Robert M., Studies Concerning Minimal Time Solutions to the Firing 
Squad Synchronization Problem,  Ph.D. Thesis, Carnegie Institute of 
Technology,  1966. 
Burks, Arthur W., "Automata Models of Self-Reproduction." Information 
Processing (May, 1966) 121-123. Information Processing Society of 
Japan. 
,    "Cellular Automata."    Pp.   100-111 of Theory of Finite and 
Probabilistic Automata,  edited by M.  A.  Gavrilov.   MJSCOW:  Nauka,  1965. 
(Russian). 
-,    "Computation,  Behavior and Structure in Fixed and Growing 
Automata."    Behavioral Science 6  (1961)  5-22.    Original version and 
discussion in Self-Organising Systems  (edited by Marshall Yovits and 
Scott Cameron).    New York:   Pergamon Press,  1960,  282-311,  312-314. 
-,    "Electronic Computing Circuits."   Proceedings of the Institute 
of Radio Engineers 35  (August,  1947)  756-767. 
-,    "The Logic of Fixed and Growing Automata."    Proceedings of an 
International Symposium on the Theory of Switchings  2-5 April 1957. 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1959, Part I,  147-188. 
-,    "Programming and the Theory of Automata."    Pp.  100-117 of 
Computer Programming and Formal Systems. Edited by P. Braffort and 
D. Hirschberg. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company, 1963. 
Also to appear in Essays on Cellular Automata. 
-,    "Super Electronic Computing Machine."    Electronics Industries 
5   (July,   1946)  62-67,  96. 
Burks, Arthur W., "Toward a Theory of Automata Based on More Realistic 
Primitive Elements." Pp. 379-385 of Information Processing 1962, 
Proceedings of IFIP Congress 62.   Edited by C. M. Popplewell. 
Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company, 1963.  Also to appear 
in Essays on Cellular Automata. 
Burks, Arthur W. and Hao Wang,  "The Logic of Automata." Journal of the 
Association for Computing Machinery  4 (1957) 193-218, 279-297. 
Burks, Arthur W. and J.B. Wright, "Sequence Generators and Digital Computers." 
Pp. 139-199 of Recursive Function Theory  (Proceedings of Symposia 
in Pure Mathematics, Vol. V). Providence, Rhode Island: American 
Mathematical Society, 1962. 

=== PAGE 104 ===

98 
Abstract and discussion in Pvojccdings of the International 
Conference on Information Frooessing,  UNEICO,  Parts 15-20 June  1959, 
pp. 425.  Paris: UNESCO, 1960. 
-, "Theory of Logical Nets." Proceedings of the Institute of 
Radio Engineers  41 (October, 1953), 1357-1365.  Reprinted in Sequential 
Machines  — Selected Papers  193-212. Edited by E.F. Moore.  Reading, 
Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1964. 
Church, Alonzo, "Application of Recursive Arithmetic to the Problem of 
Circuit Synthesis."  In Summer Institute for Symbolic Logic Summaries, 
Institute for Defense Analysis (1957). 
Church, Alonzo, "Application of Recursive Arithmetic to the Theory of 
Computers and Automata." Notes from summer conference course in 
Advanced Theory of the Logical Design of Digital Computers,  The 
University of Michigan (1958). 
Codd, Edgar F., "Propagation, Computation, and Construction in Two-Dimensional 
Cellular Spaces." 152 pp. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Mich- 
igan, 1965. Also published as Cellular Automata,  1968. (Academic Press). 
Comfort, W.T., "Highly Parallel Machines." Pp. 126-155 of Proceedings 
of a Workshop on Computer Organization.     Edited by Barnum and Knapp. 
New York: Spartan Books, 1963. 
 , "A Modified Holland Machine," Proceedings of the 196S Fall 
Joint Computer Conference,   Institute of Electrical and Electronic 
Engineers, 1963. 
Davis, M., Computability and Unsolvability.     McGraw-Hill, 1958. 
Elgot, Calvin C., "Decision problems of finite automata design and related 
arithmetics." Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 98 (1961) 21-51. 
Fisher, R.A., The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection.     Dover, 1958. 
Flanigan, Larry K., and Henry H. Swain, "Computer Simulation of A-V Nodal 
Conduction." The University of Michigan Medical Center Journal  33 
(1967) 234-241. 
Friedberg, R.M., "A Learning Machine; Part I." IBM Journal of Research 
and Development  2 (1958) 2-13. 
Friedman, Joyce, "Some Results in Church's Restricted Recursive Arithmetic." 
Journal of Symbolic Logic 22  (December, 1957) 337-342. 
 , "A Decision Procedure for Computations of Finite Automata'.' 
Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery  9 (1962) 315-323. 
Garner, H.L., and J.S. Squire, "Iterative Circuit Computers." Pp. 156-181 
of Proceedings of a Workshop on Computer Oragnization.    Edited by 
Barnum and Knapp. New York: Spartan Books, 1963. 

=== PAGE 105 ===

99 
Gerlernter, H., et. al. "Empirical Explorations of the Geometry-Theory 
Proving Machine." Pp. 143-149 of Proceedings of the Westezm Joint 
Computer Conference, San Francisco, May,  1960. 
GÖdel,  Kurt,    "Über formal unentscheidbare Sätze der Principia Mathematica 
and verwandter Systeme I."   Monatshefte fur Mathematik und Physik 
38  (1931)   173-198.     (English translation by Elliott Mendelson in 
The Undecidable,  edited by Martin Davis, pp.  4-38.  Hewlett, New York: 
Raven Press,  1965.) 
Godel,  Kurt,    "On Undecidable Propositions of Formal Mathematical Systems." 
Mimeographed notes on lectures delivered at the Institute for Advanced 
Study,  Princeton, New Jersey.    February-May,  1934.    31 pages.     (Reprinted 
as pp.   39-74 of The Undecidable,  above.) 
Goldstine, H.H.,  and Adele Goldstine,     "The Electronic Numerical Integrator 
and Computer (ENIAC)."   Mathematical Tables and Other Aids to Computation 
2  (July,   1946)  97-110 and frontispiece. 
Guttman,  B.S.,  "A Resolution of Rosen's Paradox for Self-Reproducing Automata." 
Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics 28  (1966)   191-194. 
Hennie,  Frederick C.,    "Analysis of bilateral  iterative networks."    Trans- 
actions of the Institute of Radio Engineers Professional Group on 
Circuit Theory CT-6 (1959)  35-45. 
Herdan,  R.,    "A Logical Model for Growth and Differentiation in Multi-Celled 
Organisms."    Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics 27  (1965)  379-393. 
Holladay, J.C.   and Ulam, S.M.,    "On Some Combinational Problems in Patterns 
of Growth,  I."    Notices of the American Mathematical Society 7 (1960)  234. 
Holland, J.H.,    "Concerning Efficient Adaptive Systems."    Pp.   215-230 of 
Self-Organizing Systems— 1962.     Edited by M.C.  Yovits, G.T. Jacobi, 
and G.D.  Goldstein.    Washington,D.C.:  Spartan Books,   1962. 
'Iterative Circuit Computers."    Pp.  259-265 of Proceedings of 
the 1960 Western Joint Computer Conference,  Institute of Radio 
Engineers,  1960.    Also in Essays on Cellular Automata. 
 ,    "Outline for a Logical Theory of Adaptive Systems."   Journal 
of the Association for Computing Machinery 9  (July,   1962)   297-314. 
Also in Essays on Cellular Automata. 
'A Universal Computer Capable of Executing an Arbitrary Number 
of Sub-Programs Simultaneously."    Pp.   108-113 of the Proceedings of 
the 1959 Eastern Joint Computer Conference,  Institute of Radio Engineers, 
1959.    Also in Essays on Cellular Automata. 
 ,    "Information Processing in Adaptive Systems."    Pp.   330-338 of 
Information Processing in the Nervous System, Vol.   Ill of the 
Proceedings of the International Union of Physiological Sciences,  XXII 
International Conference,  Leiden,   1962. 

=== PAGE 106 ===

100 
"Universal Embedding Spaces for Automata." Pp. 223-243 of 
Cybemetias of the Nervous System, Ih'ogress in Brain Research,  Vol. 17. 
Edited by Norbert Wiener and J.P. Schade.  New York: Elsevier, 1965. 
"Iterative Circuit Computers: Characterization and Resume 
of Advantages and Disadvantages." Pp. 171-178 of Microeleatronias 
and Large Systems.     Edited by Mathis, Wiley, and Spandorfer. New York: 
Spartan Books, 1965. Also in Essays on Cellular Automata. 
Holland, J.H., "Universal Spaces: A Basis for Studies of Adaption." 
Pp. 218-230 of Automata Theory.     Edited by E.R. Caianiello. 
New York: Academic Press, 1965. 
Jacobson, Homer,  "On Models of Reproduction." American Scientist  46 (1958) 
255-284. 
Kemeny, John G.,  "Man Viewed as a Machine." Scientific Amerlaan  192 
(1955) 58-67. 
Kister, Stein, Ulam, Waiden and Wells, "Experiments in Chess." Journal 
of the Assoaiation for Computing Machinery  4 (April, 1957). 
Kleene, S.C., "Representation of Events in Nerve Nets and Finite Automata." 
Pp. 3-41 of Automata Studies,  edited by C.E. Shannon and J. McCarthy. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1956.  (This appeared originally 
as Rand Corporation Memorandum RM-704, 101 pp., dated December 15, 1951.) 
Lee, C.Y., "A Turing Machine Which Prints Its Own Code Script." Pp. 155-164 
of Proceedings of the Symposium on Mathematical Theory of Automata, 
New York, April,   1962.     Brooklyn, New York: Polytechnic Press, 1963. 
Lehmer, D.H., E. Lehmer, W.H. Mills, and J.L. Selfridge, "Machine Proof 
of a Theorem on Cubic Residues." Mathematics of Computation  16 
(October, 1962) 407-415. 
Lofgren, Lars, "Automata of High Complexity and Methods of Increasing 
Their Reliability by Redundancy." Information and Control  1   (1958) 
127-147. 
"Self-Repair as a Computability Concept in the Theory of 
Automata." Pp. 205-222 of Proceedings of the Symposium on 
Mathematical Theory of Automata,  New York,  April,   1962.  Microwave 
Research Institute Symposium Series, Vol. XII, edited by Jerome Fox. 
Brooklyn, New York: Polytechnic Press of the Polytechnic Institute 
of Brooklyn, 1963. 
Menzel, M.T., P.R. Stein, and S.M. Ulam, Quadratic Transformations, 
Part I, Report LA-2305, Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, 1959. 
158 Pages. Office of Technical Services, U.S. Department of 
Commerce, Washington, D.C. 
Mesarovic, Mihajlo D., ed.. Views on General Systems Theory.   Proceedings 
of the Second Systems Symposium at Case Institute of Technology. 
New York: John Wiley, 1964. 

=== PAGE 107 ===

101 
Minsky, M., "Steps Toward Artificial Intelligence." Proceedings of the 
Institute of Radio Engineers  46 (1961) 8-30. 
Moore, Edward F., "Artificial Living Plants." Scientific American  195 
(1956) 118-126. 
-, "The Firing Squad Synchronization Problem." Pp. 213-214 of 
Sequential Machines.   Edited by E.F. Moore. Reading, Mass.: Addison- 
Wesley Publishing Company, 1964, 
-, "Machine Models of Self-Reproduction." Pp. 17-33 of 
Mathematical Problems in the Biological Sciences.     Proceedings of 
Symposia in Applied Mathematics, Vol. XIV. Providence, Rhode Island: 
American Mathematical Society, 1962. Also in Essays on Cellular Automata. 
-, "Machine Models of Self-Reproduction." Abstract 560-52, 
Notices of the American Mathematical Society  6 (1959) 622-623. 
"Gedanken-Experiments on Sequential Machines." Pp. 129-153 of 
Automata Studies,  edited by C.E. Shannon and J. McCarthy. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 1956. 
 , "Mathematics in the Biological Sciences." Scientific American 
211 (September, 1964) 148-164. 
Mukhopadhyay, A., "Representation of Events in the von Neumann Cellular 
Model." Technical Report No. 28, July, 1967. Computer Group, Tata 
Institute of Fundamental Research, Bombay, India.  Also in Journal 
of the Association for Computing Machinery  15 (1968) 693-705. 
Myhill, John, "The Abstract Theory of Self-Reproduction." Pp. 106-118 of 
Views on General Systems Theory,  Proceedings of the Second Systems 
Symposium at Case Institute of Technology. Edited by M.D. Mesarovic. 
New York: John Wiley, 1964. Also to appear in Essays on Cellular 
Automata. 
-, "The Converse of Moore's Garden-of-Eden Theorem." Proceedings 
of the American Mathematical Society    14 (August, 1963) 685-686. 
Also to appear in Essays in Cellular Automata. 
McCulloch, W.S., and W. Pitts, "A Logical Calculus of the Ideas Immanent 
in Nervous Activity." Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics  5 (1943) 
115-133. 
McNaughton, R., "The Theory of Automata, a Survey." Pp. 379-421 of 
Advances in Computers,  Vol. 2. Edited by F.L. Alt. New York: 
Academic Press, 1961. 
McNaughton, Robert, "On Nets Made up of Badly Timed Elements, Part I; 
Slow But Perfectly Timed Elements." Mimeographed, 30 pages. 
Philadelphia: Moore School of Elf :trical Engineering, University 
of Pennsylvania, 1961. 

=== PAGE 108 ===

102 
Newell, A.,    "On Programming a Highly Parallel Machine to be an Intelligent 
Technician," Proceedings of the Weatexm Joint Computer Conference3 
Institute of Radio Engineers,  1960,  pp.  267-282. 
Newell,  A., J.C.   Shaw and H.A.  Simon,    "Empirical Explorations of the Logic 
Theory Machine:  A Case Study in Heuristics."    Report P-951,  Rand Cor- 
poration  (1957). 
 ,    "A Variety of Intelligent  Learning in a General Problem Solver." 
In Self-Organizing Systems.  Edited by Marshall Yovits and Scott Cameron. 
New York:   Pergamon Press,  1950. 
Oparin,  A.I.,     The Origin of Life on Earth,  third edition.    New York:  Academic 
Press,  1957. 
Pattee, Howard H.,    "On the Origin of Macromolecular Sequences."    Biophysical 
Journal (November, 1961) 683-710. 
Penrose,  L.S.,    "Self-Reproducing Machines."   Scientific American 200 
(1959)  105-114. 
Pontecorvo,  G.,     "Self-Reproduction and All That."    Pp.  1-5 of Symposium of 
the Society for Experimental Biology   (Great Britain),  Vol.   12. 
Cambridge,  England:    Cambridge University Press,  1958. 
Post, E.L.,    "Formal Reductions of the General Combinatoral Decision Problem." 
American Journal of Mathematics 65  (1943)  197-215. 
 ,    "Finite Combinatoral Processes -- Formulation I."    Journal of 
Symbolic Logic I   (1936)  103-104. 
Rabin, Michael 0.,    "Probabilistic Automata," Information and Control 6 
(September,   1963)  230-245.  Reprinted in Sequential Machines, pp.  98-114. 
Edited by E.F. Moore.    Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley,   1964. 
Rabin, M.O.  and D.  Scott,    "Finite Automata and Their Decision Problems." 
IBM Journal of Research and Development 3  (1959)   114-125. 
Rado, T.,    "On Non-Computable Functions."    Bell System Technical Journal 
41   (1962)   877-884. 
Rochester, N.,  L.H. Haibt, John Holland,  and W.L. Duda,    "Tests on a Cell 
Assembly Theory of the Action of the Brain."   Institute of Radio 
Engineers Transactions on Information Theory (September,  1956)  80-93. 
Rosen, Robert,    "On a Logical Paradox Implicit in the Notion of a Self- 
Reproducing Automaton." Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics  28 
(1966)   149-151. 
Rosenberg, Richard,    Simulation of Genetic Populations with Biochemical 
Properties.     Ph.D.  Thesis, University of Michigan,  1967. 
Samuel, A.L.,    "Some Studies in Machine Learning Using the Game of Checkers." 
IBM Journal of Research and Development 3 (1959)  211-229.    "Some 
Studies in Machine Learning Using the Game of Checkers II -- Recent 
Progress."    Ibid.    11  (1967) 601-617. 

=== PAGE 109 ===

I 
103 
Schrandt,  R.G.  and S.M.  Ulam,    "On Patterns of Growth of Figures in Two 
Dimensions."    Notices of the Amerioan Mathematical Society 7 (1960)642. 
 ,    "On Recursively Defined Geometrical Objects and Patterns of 
Growth."    To appear in Essays on Cellular Automata. 
Selfridge, O.G.,    "Pandemonium, a Paradigm for Learning."    In Mechanization 
of Thought Processes.     National Physical Laboratory Symposium Number 10. 
London:  Her Majesty's Stationary Office,  1959. 
Shannon, Claude E.,    "Computers and Automata."    Proceedings of the Institute 
of Radio Engineers 41   (1953)  10. 
-,    "A Mathematical Theory of Communication."    The Bell System Tech- 
nical Journal 27  (1948)   379-423,  623-656. 
 ,    "Programming a Computer for Playing Chess."   Philosophical 
Magazine 41   (March,  1950). 
-, "Von Neumann's Contributions to Automata Theory." Bulletin 
of the American Mathematical Society  64 (No. 3, Part 2, 1958) 123-129. 
Squire, J.S. and S.M. Palais, "Programming and Design Considerations of 
a Highly Parallel Computer." Proceedings of the Spring Joint Computer 
Conference,   Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, 1964. 
Stahl, Walter R., "Algorithmically Unsolvable Problems for a Cell Automaton." 
Journal of Theoretical Biology  8 (1965) 371-394. 
-, "A Model of Self-Reproduction Based on String Processing Finite 
Automata." Pp. 43-72 of Natural Automata and Useful Simulations; 
Proceedings of a Symposium on Fundamental Biological Models, Stanford 
University, 1965. Edited by H.H. Pattee, E.A. Edelsack, Louis Fein, 
and A.B. Callahan. Washington, D.C.: Spartan Books, 1966. 
-, "Self-Reproducing Automata." Perspectives in Biology and Medicine 
8 (1965) 373-393. 
Stahl, Walter, Robert W. Coffin and Harry E. Goheen,    "Simulation of Biological 
Cells by Systems Composed of String-Processing Finite Automata."    Pp.  89-102 
of Proceedings of the Spring Joint Computer Conference,  1964. 
Stein,  P.R. and S.M.  Ulam,    "Non-Linear Transformation Studies on Electronic 
Computers."   Rozprany Matematyozne XXXIX, Warsaw,  1964. Also to appear 
in Essays on Cellular Automata. 
Thatcher, James,    "The Construction of a Self-Describing Turing Machine." 
Pp.   165-171 of Proceedings of the Symposium on Mathematical Theory 
of Automata, Neu York, April,  1962.    Brooklyn, New York:    Polytechnic 
Press, 1963. 
Turing, A.M., "The Chemical Basis of Morphogenesis." Phil. Trans. Roy. 
Soc. of London Mathematical Society, Series B, Biological Sciences, 
Vol.   237,  August,  1952,  pp.   37-72. 

=== PAGE 110 ===

^WH- 
104 
"On Computable Numbers, With an Application to the Entschei- 
dungsproblem." Vroaeedings of the London Mathematical Society, 
Series 2, 42 (1936-37) 230-265. "A Correction", Ibid* 43 (1937) 
544-546. (Reprinted in The Undeoidable, edited by Martin Davis, 
pp.   115-154, Hewlett, New York:   Raven Press,  1965.) 
Turing, A.M.,     "Computing Machinery and Intelligence."    Mind 59  (1950) 
433-460. 
Ulam, S.M.,    A Collection of Mathematical Problems.    New York:   Interscience 
Publishers,  Inc.,  1960. 
"Electronic Computers and Scientific Research."    Pp.  95-108 of 
The Age of Electronics.    Edited by C.F.J. Overhage.  New York: McGraw- 
Hill,   1962. 
"Random Processes and Transformation."   Proceedings of the 
International Congress of Mathematiciansj  1950, Vol.  II, pp.  264-275. 
Providence, Rhode Island: American Mathematical Society,  1952. 
"On Some Mathematical Problems Connected With Patterns of 
Growth of Figures."    Pp.  215-224 of   Mathematical Problems in the 
Biological Sciences.    Proceedings of Symposia in Applied MAthematics, 
Vol.   14,  Providence, Rhode Island:    American Mathematical Society, 
1962.    Also to appear in Essays on Cellular Automata. 
"On Some New Possibilities in the Organization and Use of 
Computing Machines."    IBM Research Report 68,  1957,  IBM Corporation, 
Yorktowm Heights, New York. 
Von Neumann, John,    Collected Works.     Six volumes.    Edited by A.H.  Taub. 
New York:  MacMillan,  1961-1963.    Vol.  V is entitled Design of Computers, 
Theory of Automata and Numerical Analysis.    References to these volumes 
will be made as follows:  "Collected Works 5.288-328" refers to pp.   288- 
328 of Vol.  V. 
Von Neumann, John,    The Computer and the Brain.    With a preface by Klara 
von Neumann, pp.  v-x.    New Haven:  Yale University Press,  1958. 
Review of Norbert Wiener's Cybernetics, or Control and 
Communication in the Animal and the Machine.  Physics Today 2 (1949) 
33-34. 
"The General and Logical Theory of Automata."    Pp.   1-41 of 
Cerebral Mechanisms in Behavior - The Hixon Symposium,  edited by 
L.A. Jeffress. New York:  John Wiley,  1951.    Collected Works 5.288-328. 
"Probabilistic Logics and the Synthesis of Reliable Organisms 
from Unreliable Components."    Pp.   43-98 of Automata Studies, edited 
by C.E.  Shannon and J. McCarthy.     Princeton:  Princeton University 
Press,  1956.    Collected Works 5.329-378. 
Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata.  Edited and completed by 
Arthur W.   Burks.    Urbana:  University of Illinois Press,  1966. 

=== PAGE 111 ===

105 
Errata: 
pp. 159, par.   2 - the times should be t+8, t+9, t+10; 
pp. 171, line 21 - "IQd" should be "IQe"; 
pp. 174, line 4 - replace "n" by "5p"; 
pp. 179, line 18 - "pulser" should be "decoder". 
Von Neumann, John and 0. Morgenstern,    Theory of Games and Eoonomio Behavior. 
Princeton:  Princeton University Press,  1947. 
Wagner,  Eric G.,    "An Approach to Modular Computers,1:    Spider Automata 
and Embedded Automata."   IBM Research Report 1107, January 28,  1964, 
Yorktown Heights, New York. 
Wagner,  Eric G.,    "Modular Computers,  II:    Graph Theory and the Inter- 
connection of Modules."    IBM Research Report RC 1414, June 4,  1965, 
Yorktown Heights, New York. 
Waksman,  Abraham,    "An Optimum Solution to the Firing Squad Synchronization 
Problem."    Information and Control 9  (1966)  67-78. 
Wang, Hao,    "Universal Turing Machines:    An Exercise in Coding."    Z.   Mzth. 
Logik Grundlagen Math.    3  (1957)  69-80. 
-,    "Circuit Synthesis by Solving Sequential Boolean Equations." 
Z.  Math.  Logik Grundlagen Math.    5  (1959)  291-322. 
 ,    "A Variant to Turing's Theory of Computing Machines."   Journal 
of the Association of Computing Machines 4   (1957) 63-92. 
Watanabe,  Shigeru,      "S-^-^o!  8-State ar ^ 5-Symbol 6-State Universal 
Turing Machines."    Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery 
8  (October,  1961)  476-483. 
Wiener, Norbert,    Cyhemetias, or Control and Communication in the Animal 
and the Machine.     New York:    John Wiley § Sons,  Inc.,  1948. 
Wigner, E.P., "The Probability of the Existence of a Self-Reproducing 
Unit."   Pp.  231-248 of The Logic of Personal Knowledge (Essays pre- 
sented to Michael Polanyi).    Glencoe,  Illinois: The Free Press,   1961. 
Wright, S.,    "Physiological Genetics, Ecology of Populations, and Natural 
Selection."    Pp.   429-475 of The Evolution of Life,  Vol.  1.    Edited by 
Sol Tax.    Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1960. 
Yamada, H.,    "Real-time Computation and Recursive Functions Not Real-time 
Computable." Transactions of the Institute of Radio Engineers EC-11 
(December,  1962)   753-760. 

=== PAGE 112 ===

rr 
IINn.AS.STFTF.n 
Security Classification 
1                                                      DOCUMENT CONTROL DATA • R&D                                                          1 
|             (Smeurtlr el»*»llle»tlon of lltlt, body el abtlracl and Indmumg annotation muaf »a antaratf iW)an Ma ovtmll rapert ta clfiillmd)             \ 
1   OHIGIHATINC ACrivfy (Coiponlm author) 
Logic of Computers Group 
The University of Michigan 
Ann Arbor, Michigan 
I«    RCRORT SKCURITV   C CAItlFICATION 
Unclassified 
1*   OROUR 
J   REPORT TITLI 
VON NEUMANN'S SELF-REPRODUCING AUTOMATA 
4   OCtCRIPTIVK NOTtt (Typo of import and Insfaalva dmloo) 
Technical Report 
1  »UTMORW (Ltol ntmo. lint nomo, InlUtl) 
Arthur W.  Burks 
•   RtPORT OATK 
June 1969 
Tm-   TOTAL NO. Of  RA«B« 
110 132                               1 
■ a    CONTRACT OR GRANT NO. 
;,\ *i-124-ARO-D-483 
b.   ^Mv >«-. "   NO. 
c. 
d. 
• a.  ORKMNATOR't RBRORT NUMRERW 
O8226-II-T 
10 AVAILAaiLITV/LIMITAtlON NOTICtl 
Distribution of This Document is Unlimited 
II   tURRLIMINTANY NOTES l|. IPOMSORINO MILITARY ACTIVITY 
U.  S. Army Office    (Durham) 
Durham, North Carolina 
IJ   ABSTRACT 
John von Neumann's kinematic and cellular automaton systems are des- 
cribed.    A complete informal description of the cellular system is 
presented including an explanation of the realization of logical components, 
the design of computer organs,  the construction, destruction and move- 
ment of organs by sequences of internally originated pulses, universal 
computation and construction,  and self-reproduction.    Connections between 
von Neumann's automaton research and his work on computer design are 
brought out,  and the significance of cellular arrays for biological 
research discussed. 
DD <T**.< 1473 UNCLASSIFIED 
Security Classification 
J 

=== PAGE 113 ===

!"i,i '!. 
UNCLASSIFIED 
Security Classification 
14 
KEY WORDS 
LINK A 
NOUS 
LINK 0 
MOLC 
LINK C 
ROLK 
cellular automata 
von Neumann 
self-reproduction 
biological models 
universal computation and construction 
INSTRUCTIONS 
1.   ORIGINATING ACTIVITY.   Enter th« nam* and addrata 
of tha contractor, aubcontractor, grantt«, Oopartmant of Da- 
fanaa activity or othar organisation fcoiporal« author) itaulng 
tha rapott. 
3a.   RBPORT SECURITY CLASSIFICATION:   Entar tha ovar- 
all aacurity claaaification of tha rapott.   Indicata whathar 
"Raatrictad Data" ia includad   Marfctn« ia to ba in accord- 
anca with appropriata aacurity ragulationa. 
2b.   GROUP:   Automatic downgrading ia apecifiad in OoD Dl- 
ractiva 5300.10 and Armad Forcaa Industrial Manual, Enter 
tha group nuaibar.   Alto, whan applicable, ahow that optional 
markings have been used for Group 3 end Group 4 as author- 
ised. 
3. REPORT TITLE:   Enter the complete report title in all 
capital tattere.   Titles in all caaea ahould be unclassified. 
If a meaningful title cannot be selected without classifica- 
tion, show title classification in all capitala in parentheais 
immediately following the Utle. 
4. DESCRIPTIVE NOTES:   If appropriate, enter the type of 
report, e.g., interim, prngreas, summary, annual, or final. 
Give the inclusive dates when s specific reporting period is 
covered. 
5. AUTHOR(S):   Enter the name(s) of authoKa) aa ahown on 
or In tha report.   Ent« teat name, first name, middle initial. 
If aülitary, ahow rank and branch of service.   The name of 
the principal author is an abaoluta minimum requirement 
6. REPORT DATE:   Enter the date of the report aa day, 
month, year, or month, year.   If more than one date appeara 
on the report, uae date of publication. 
7«.   TOTAL NUMBER OF PAGES:   The total page count 
ahould follow normal pagination procedurea. La., enter the 
number of pagea containing information. 
7b.   NUMBER OP REFERENCES:   Enter the total number of 
referencea cited la the report. 
Sa.   CONTRACT OR OR ANT NUMBER:   If appropriata, enter 
tha applicable number of the contract or grant under which 
tha report waa written, 
Sb, Se. fcM.  PROJECT NUMBER:   Enter the appropriate 
military dapartmant identlflcetion, auch aa project number, 
aiihpfojaet mtmber, ayatem numbare, taak number, etc. 
9a.  ORIOINATOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S):   Enter the offi- 
cial report mimbar by which the document will be Identified 
and controlled by the originating activity.   Thla number must 
ba unique to thla report. 
96. OTHER REPORT NUMBERS): If the report haa been 
aaalgned any other rapcrt numbers (either by the originator 
or by the oponoor), alao enter thla numbeKa). 
10.   AVAILABILITY/LIMITATION NOTICES:   Enter any Jim- 
itatlona on further diaaemination of the report, other than tboae 
impoaed by aacurity classificstion, using standard statements such as: 
(1)    "Qualified requesters may obtain copies of this 
report from DDC" 
(3)    "Foreign announcement end dissemination of this 
report by DDC ia not authorised." 
(3)    "U. S. Government agenciea may obtain copies of 
thla report directly from DDC   Other qualified DDC 
uaera ahall request through 
(4)    "U. S. military agenciea may obtain copies of this 
report directly from DDC  Other quslified users 
shsll request through 
(5)    "All distribution of this report is controlled.  Qusl- 
ified DDC users shall request through 
If the report hea been furnished to the Office of Technical 
Services, Department of Commerce, for aale to the public, indi- 
cate thla fact and enter the price, if known 
IL SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES: Use for additional explana- 
tory notea. 
12. SPONSORING MILITARY ACTIVITY: Enter the neme of 
the departmental project office or laboratory sponsoring (poy 
ing lor) the research end development   Include address. 
13. ABSTRACT:   Enter en abstract giving a brief and factual 
aummary of the document indicetive of the report, even though 
it may alao appear elaewhere in the body of the technical re- 
port.   If additional apace ia required, e continuation aheet shall 
be attached. 
It ia highly deairable thet the abatract of claaaified reports 
be unelaaaifiad.   Each paragraph of tha abstract ahall end with 
an indication of the military aacurity claaaification of the in- 
formation in the paragraph, represented aa (TS), (S). (C). or (V) 
There ia no limitation on the length of the abstract.   How- 
ever, the auggeated length is from ISO to 225 words. 
14. KEY WORDS:   Key worda are technically meeningful terms 
or abort phraeea that characterise a report and may be used as 
indes entries for ceteloging the report.   Key words must be 
selected so thet no security clsssificetion is required.   Identi- 
fiers, such aa equipment model designation, trade name, military 
project code neme, geographic location, may be uaed ea key 
words but will be followed by sn indicetion of technicel con- 
test.   Ute assignment of links, rules, snd weights is optional. 
UNCLASSIFIED 
Security Classification 